COMFORT WAR
===========

Jason Esh




You don't know what you're up against.

You might think,

you do not have within you a desire burning so great, it turns the world
to boiling.

Brother,

Sister,

you do.


INTRODUCTION  
=============

Hi, my name is Jason Esh and what I'm about to share with you is my war
story.

I'd wager, in fact, that it is your war story as well. I'd wager that
for you too, it's not yet over. But that's no matter. It's never too
late to enlist, and it is after all a raw and satisfying fight.

See, combat can be spent unknowingly. If you're stuck, depleted or
frustrated---despite your best efforts---it may be because you're
fighting the wrong guy.

I was. In what I call "cycles of attrition", I would waver between
periods of intense energy and exhausted apathy. I tried every trick in
the book to get inspired, but somehow none of it ever came to fruition.
I wasn't objectively better at the end of the day. If anything, these
repeated efforts eroded my sense of aspiration. What was the point of
riding the waves of ambition only to crash onto the shores of failure?

It was this inexplicable combination of disgust and frustration that
eventually drove me to a desperate search---and this book, is a
call-to-arms on account of what I've found. Hell, I may be writing to
myself here. But I suspect that there are many others out there that are
equally waned by this, haunted by the same miserable, monotonous beat of
a losing battle's drum.

This book is about centering your life on an effort. In it I will cover
the ethos, method and scientific understanding required to do so. It is
going to take all three, and if you think you can make out with anything
less, it isn't for you. These three pillars of the Comfort War are
knotted in a Brunnian fashion---remove one, and the structure unravels
entirely.

After all, we all love a good 'rise from the ashes' story. Friedrich
Nietzsche, the German philosopher, famously said: \"From life\'s school
of war: what does not kill me makes me stronger.\"[^1] Our superheroes
who overcome a great tormented past, the homeless man turned real-estate
tycoon, an underdog athlete overcoming great odds, Spartan children
molded in the fires of the *Agoge* and Shaolin younglings raised under
monastic training; the list is without end.

But what of those raised in comfort?

Their fight is not greater, but more insidious.

Imagine a brilliant magician perform, demonstrating great powers. Which
would impress you more? If his gift of magic was true, or if he had
instead worked a skill and convinced you that it was?

Without a strong driven sense of clarity, those instilled with comfort
are fighting against something far less determinable. Worse yet, they
are too often inclined to underestimate it, and perpetually fail.

Know this: you're frustrated because of a deep incongruence within you.
In essence, because you are not **you**--you're not the way you should
be. This term has other names you might have heard of as well, such as
the discovering of the "self", whom one might achieve through meditation
or similar practices. In fact, many of the answers presented here are
already out there, but not yet framed properly, not suitably compiled,
rendered useless.

So, nothing is more important than for you first to understand your
enemy---and specifically, deeply respect the challenge ahead. Without an
origin story, liberating yourself from both your nature and nurture is
truly heroic.

Make no mistake, you're at war with yourself.


COST 
====
# CHAPTER ONE

The definitive, most pathological aspect of my struggle against myself
had always been the way in which, despite my great need, a pervasive
incomprehension denied me the ability to just "look it up". Call it
brain fog, clouding of consciousness, moha, call it anything you like;
this cognitive impairment had always been there, and was therefore (by
definition) nearly impossible to address.

**This in and of itself, is the crux of the Comfort War; the lack of
clarity.**

I'd argue that clarity is the opposite of comfort---the perfect weapon
in your arsenal. Relentless pursuit of clarity, is the relentless
pursuit of a **stable foundation** upon which you can build your
discipline. Without it, your efforts are a house of cards, your
motivation a fleeting interest and all there to support a whim that has
yet been dissuaded from taking a tumble.

This simple piece, is nearly always overlooked in conventional stories
of success, as the concept of clear-thinking isn't easily recalled of a
struggle by those who've already attained it. Our role models will
remember the hardship, moments of despair, the "just do it" mentality,
but not the (seemingly trivial) fact that they were able to focus in and
see things for what they were.

Knowing this, your challenge is to regain composure and get the
information that is relevant to your reaching a stable starting point.
And as with any worthwhile adventure, it will not be effortless.

Should you attain it, you'll suddenly find all the advice you've heard
thus far to be sharply applicable. Your efforts then can be justly
fought for once more, supported by a vivid coherence, in the simple
matter that is rising up to live life in all the glory and beauty it has
to offer. Such clarity, is the rarest currency in our day-and-age, for
sight cannot be easily attained by seeking.

---

Now, it's time to get into some details. Shall we?

The nature of this struggle, is that it is nearly impossible to adapt
**at-once** the total composure necessary to face a hardwired
inclination toward comfort-seeking.

Many cognitive neuroscientists argue that only 5% of our cognitive
activities (decisions, emotions, actions, behaviors, et cetera) are
conscious whereas the remainder is generated in a non-conscious
manner[^2]. In such a fashion, we are overwhelmingly managed by our
subconscious.

Makes sense, doesn't it? Imagine having to actively instruct your heart
to pump, or your lungs to draw breath; that would be absurd. Instead,
this mechanism allows us to essentially "program" the way in which we
operate on a day-to-day basis, based on what we've done and experienced
in the past---resulting in these repetitious activities becoming
automated. Most notably, this "automating" isn't just limited to your
physiology, it also includes the ways in which your thought-process
unfolds as you engage in routines to which you've become accustomed.

In other words,

95% of our "programming", thinking and intuition power forward on a
one-way non-stop **habitual** course, whilst our meager conscious minds
stand alone to oppose them. For a heroically miniscule portion of your
experience, you'll perhaps be able to make some real decisions and
resolve to change these poor habits through sheer willpower---but during
the rest? Not a chance; you've tried that, haven't you?

What ends up happening, is that we don't recognize these influences.
Instead we try and fix the [symptoms]{.underline}, because they are what
**we notice**, rather than the problem at **its core**. We focus our
efforts on trying to get rich, healthy, win friends, influence people,
et cetera. Like I said earlier, you're fighting the wrong guy. You may
realize there's an engine problem when your car engine breaks down, but
what use is fixing pistons and cylinders if you all along you've not
once bothered changing your oil.

The solution is finding a way to extract yourself on a daily basis out
of the mindless haze that permeates below your level of awareness; to
"reset" daily. Resolve to fight, daily. As it stands, subconscious
comfort-seeking is certain to engulf your thinking at one point or
another each and every day---the difference this time, however, will be
that through understanding the mechanism that causes it, you'll be able
to regularly obstruct this cycle. By employing a reset, your clarity
inches forward, progressively stacking the odds in your
favor---eventually overtaking comfortable mindlessness.

So, how does this work?

The pursuit of comfort, is often an attempt to use the (more common)
method of **thought suppression** to drown out negative emotional
impulses instead of using the (more effective) method of **cognitive
reappraisal** to change the way we think and address a potentially
emotion-eliciting event (''I control my emotions by not thinking of
them'' versus "I control my emotions by changing the way I think about
the situation I'm in''). Instead of overcoming our fears, anxieties,
urges, stressors---or even boredom---we push them out of our minds and
encourage them to lie dormant. Not only has the repeated use of
suppression over reappraisal been often associated with a higher
frequency of such emotions[^3] and obsessive-compulsive disorder[^4], it
has been further shown that such maladaptive attempts at inhibiting
negative emotional impulses are a process that eventually becomes
unconscious and automated over time[^5].

In other words, **in an attempt to feel better--you'll feel worse, more
often,** with potential for very **hazardous consequences** that will
only become **harder to avoid with time**.

Tracking so far?

Essentially, once thought suppression is sufficiently practiced, you
become habituated with the impulse to "just not think about
it"---whatever "it" may be. You'll go off on **reoccurring**
auto-piloted, pain-suppressing pursuits of comfort whenever faced with
(ever increasing) negative emotional impulses. Thus, you are not only
left with the inclinations to perform your worst behaviors, but this
emotional experience isn't achieved consciously, and is therefore nearly
impossible to learn from or address in a rational manner (ever regret
something immediately after doing it, commit to never doing it again,
and repeat it sometime after?). These suppressed emotions build up until
they are eventually released in a destructive outburst---only to
somewhat calm, then rinse and repeat; **it's a cycle that seems to
suppress the exact faculties needed to extract yourself from it.**

This is why, in a commendable and desperate effort to resolve it, some
choose to subject themselves entirely to the control of others, who will
presumably impose a disciplined lifestyle upon them (in environments
such as the military, monastic training etc.). They do so in the hopes
that perhaps after many months saturated by a lack of choice, they will
"break the cycle" and gain the intuitive habits necessary to continue in
the right direction independently.

> *"I\'d grown weary of my life, had come to feel the entanglements of
> society so burdensome and disagreeable that I\'d resolved to flee them
> by becoming a Zen Buddhist monk."*[^6]
>
> *"Endure the training. Witness the transformation."*[^7]

While typical, there are many errors in this line of thought. First,
those who choose to restrict their own freedoms are bound to discover
chains that weigh heavily. Second, in all institutional environments
there will be times where your goals and the goals of the institution
don't align, and when that happens the goals of the institution will
come at your expense. Third, even if these all-powerful, non-transparent
organizations were not corrupt to the core and did have your best
interest at heart, their methods of self-discipline are ineffective; by
subjecting yourself in this way you will never be properly equipped with
the ability to **conquer yourself** through **personal doing**. They
don't teach you to conquer fear, only to fear the consequences of
disobedience more than the consequences of obedience. Assuming forced
pain is a cognitive tool that flawlessly transitions into independent
and disciplined behavior is foolishly wishful at best.

Rather, you need to understand the mechanisms of comfort well enough to
manage **willful** and **incremental growth.** In order to break the
habit of thought suppression, you will need to get accustomed to (and
eventually relish in) the composed practice of cognitive reappraisal.
You'll need to discover the limits of your stress-tolerance, repeat such
encounters, and learn to thrive on them. You'll have to investigate your
deepest fears and labor to overcome them. Even in the face of the
unavoidable cycles of willpower gain and drain, **a baseline can be
set** in a manner that encourages your pursuit and decelerates your
regressions. You deserve to have the option of an elected personal
struggle that feels right, and in place. For once, you'll feel
*inclined* to improve; eager, energetic and satisfied. Doing so through
a daily "reset" is the basic methodic principle which I will cover in
detail in the next chapter.

However, though it is entirely possible, please be warned that such a
pursuit comes at a cost---it's a measure that is exclusive to the
desperate. I understand that right now desperation may seem like your
worst enemy, but know that it can be leveraged into your greatest
strength. In the insane and dark void of mindlessness, desperation holds
the power to shine the piercing light of reckless, obsessive defiance
over and over again. As I've said before, it is nearly impossible to
**at-once** become able to maintain clarity in a constant manner. You'll
have to reinstate it **every single day**. And though you may accept
this now as a rational choice, that fact will soon elude you as you
inevitably find yourself locked once again in the malaise of
unawareness. Then, you will only be able to extract yourself from
it---consistently---through a **reliance in the choices you've made at
your most desperate hour**.

This requires your dedication to be prioritized in a way that is
equivocal to **a small measure of insanity**. Nothing, I repeat,
**nothing else** but the absolute prioritization and respect for the
challenge before you will manage to break you out of the mindless prison
that comfort has---and will---create. Though the Comfort War can have
many participants, for most it is a last-ditch effort; attempted after
all else has failed.

Now perhaps it would be more Machiavellian of me to give you some false
hope of a quick-fix instead---something that sounds good and catchy,
like "brushing your teeth using your non-dominant hand will change your
life", offering the "secrets to a 15-minute orgasm", or any other
whichever modern-day snake oil people are selling online these
days---but I'm not writing this so I can waste my time baiting addicts.
This book is about making answers available to those with the same
questions I had. Take heed and judge for yourself whether you are
willing to pay such a cost.

> *"Fear does not go away by itself. You have to confront your fear,
> mold it, then learn to control it in it's own irrational
> reality."*[^8]

In condoning the use of reason, we have to leverage the moments of
unreasonableness **so that reason can be achieved in the first place.**
This is no small matter, and you must know what you're getting into.

By setting your priorities in this manner, the most **critical** aspect
of your efforts becomes **cemented** above all other perceived
sensibilities. Irrational and absolutistic as it may seem, the pursuit
of clarity must become the most significant aspect of your life. Of
course, this doesn't mean that all other aspects should be neglected,
but you must begin to **define the success of your efforts** solely
based on your pursuit of clarity.

Most noticeably as you grow in ability to think clearly, you will likely
come to determine that some elements of your current environment are
non-conducive to your efforts (more on this in chapter 4 and 7). Those
around you who are accustomed to your old ways, may be inclined to
sabotage your attempts to change these influencing factors in the hopes
of returning their lives to the status-quo with which they are familiar,
for better or worse. As a result, these relationships very well may
change. Unfortunately, uncommon behavior is often misconstrued, and that
has negative consequences on efforts of self-improvement.

For me, it was simple choice to make. A Comfort Warrior knows rock
bottom all too well.

> *"Note to self:*
>
> *Remember what it feels like to be so faded and empty that only peak
> self-loathing is able to invigorate you? And you hate it, hate being
> forced to effort. You stop as soon as you're started, so that you can
> stop having to hurt so much. Stimulation is much better, without
> thought, or care, left alone; emotional stimulation, oral stimulation,
> auditory stimulation, visual stimulation, sexual stimulation,
> psychoactive stimulation, masochistic stimulation, stimulation,
> stimulation, exhaustion and more stimulation.*
>
> *Life seems pointless, uncontrollable, unfair. I've grasped only for
> what was already within my reach; living with a growing pit of
> suppressed anxiety, eventually revealing itself just as the coin
> tossed lands on either suicidal resolve or spiraling depression. *
>
> *Maybe exercising, quitting or dieting makes logical sense, but not
> today, not now. It isn't worth even thinking about, there is only pain
> and disappointment on that end. I'm worthless, no point even
> trying--it's wasteful, it'll never last. Uncertainty is too high a
> risk, all motivation is prone to dim, and all paths lead only to
> despair.*
>
> *We disappoint those around us, we even shame to reflect upon
> ourselves.*
>
> *These are our lives, a forfeited battle against an enemy too great.
> Conceal your wishing and prepare your shattered hopes--nothing will
> ever change."*

When most try and sell you on their "tale of success" they somehow
always neglect to mention a cardinal fact; that the buffer separating us
from our destination across such an effort, is pain.

Are we somehow supposed to know already how to bare it? Never in my life
was I forced into a struggle for survival, the horror of lacking basic
needs or the pain of forgone hope. Yet still, I was meaninglessly lost,
too shameful to accept such mediocrity as a worthy challenge.

Comfort, as I've known her, has been a seductive mistress; not pretty,
or bright, but accepting. She would not turn away anyone willing to pay
her dues. She'd been patient, and would always be there for those who've
chosen to settle for her. Relentless in her subtle pull and offering up
a temptation too great--comfort has always been sure to get her way.

If there was a real solution, I found that any moral price was far too
low--and those around you should rejoice all the more for it. You
haven't been living life, and you don't owe any part of its lacking to
others. Life only begins at the edge of your comfort zone and living is
the condition of exploring such an ever-expanding precipice. You are
you, deserving to selfishly traverse the scope of your individuality,
responsible first and foremost to yourself--and in taking action, have
only one choice.

Because Comfort Warriors don't balance.

Their pursuit is not well-rounded.

They do not schedule cheats, or earn breaks.

They drive onward, fall, get up and repeat--never once losing sight.

They push forward, until they are reborn.

It's has to be absolutistic---black and white until their goal is
reached, surely; as clearer sight has yet to be gained.

And guess what? though this part is hard, the rest is EASY. You're
fucking built for it. It's simple and without compromise. You'll care so
deeply, you'll never allow yourself to quit. Even the inclination toward
good, conducive behavior will soon become intuitive.

Hold on only to such a desperate thought, with no expectation, drive, or
even effort. This act is purely in the pursuit of good, which ultimately
benefits all, and is therefore selfless. You've chosen it because
really, it is the only choice you've got.

So you've elected this over the pits of lifeless, pervasive misery.

Hold on to that thought, and start over.

In the dire depths of subconscious mindlessness, shackle yourself to a
conspectus: "I want to become stronger".

Build yourself in the pain of desperation up into a life of unmatched
beauty.


THAT WHICH KILLS 
================
# CHAPTER TWO

I'll explain the method:

What an overdose of comfort does to your brain (more details in chapter
6), is disguise the underlying stress that exists in your system by
clouding your thinking. This is so prevalent in those who've become
accustomed to it, that it is almost impossible to notice until you've
been forcefully extracted---usually in an outburst of stress and strong
emotion---out of such a state (you may very well be in it right now). As
I've mentioned earlier, getting caught up in the momentum generated by
this "brain fog" can have disastrous consequences on your life long
before these frustrations manage to finally break through and surface
your consciousness. When this happens, those frustrations create a
short-burst of violent urgency that can often be more difficult to bear
than that which provoked it in the first place (prompting some to
further dull their senses with more comfortable stimuli).

This is obviously unhealthy and not conducive to real change. For brief
moments we are aware of the problems, but by the time we reach this
delayed state our aspirations become so complex, so unavailing, and so
seemingly insurmountable. This sense of hopelessness leads us only to
repeat our poor behaviors, time and time again---suppressing useful
resolve in exchange for momentary relief.

**You want the secret to fundamental change?** Don't allow yourself to
forget that you want it.

All that is required in order to achieve a complete overhaul of your
behavioral and cognitive habits is a consistent reminder. See, bearing a
great passion will lead to one of two certain outcomes: it will bolster
your efforts, or consume you entirely. The difference between those two
outcomes, is whether or not you are able to regularly confront your
passion, mold it, and learn to control it in its own irrational reality.

You do not need motivation. It is already smoldering inside of you, but
you've trapped it, enclosed it under layers of comfort, and the best
tool you have to change that, is dedicating yourself to a basic, daily
reminder. Simple, isn't it? But hard as hell I can assure you.

I call these daily reminders "Manual Resets". The underlying idea behind
them is not that these reminders alone **are the change** that you need,
but rather that they alone will create a consistent and authentic
baseline that **brings forth the change**. It's a solution that is
calibrated for individuals in your exact condition with these exact
strengths and weaknesses; though you are deficient in the area of
clear-thinking, your passion is fervent. This means you don't require an
arousal of ambition, but only the means to combat the clouding of your
perception. You therefore instill a simple system: consistent dedication
to an abstract notion---a daily Manual Reset, and passion ensues. Your
greatest strength is the intensity of that vigor (which has made you so
susceptible to its suppression in the first place), and therefore you
need not worry about what comes after clarity is regained, as passion
erupts on its own, I assure you. As it is, only our kind is capable of
both crafting and enduring such insane desperation that has led you to
whole-hearted commitment in the first place, use that to your advantage.

Let's focus on some background information and then go further into the
details of the MR.

Over generational eons, mankind has both struggled and succeeded in
improving the quality of life for future generations. Comfort has never
before been the enemy, so what makes our time so different? What has
caused this era to be so unprecedented?

In 1973[^9], Nobel laureate Nikolaas Tinbergen coined the term
"supernormal stimulus" to describe an artificially exaggerated version
of a stimulus that can occur naturally. Supernormal stimulus is the
effect that attracts moths to death-by-artificial-light because they
think that they are following the moon. It is the reason that oftentimes
male giant jewel beetles will try and mate with empty beer bottles and
ignore their female counterparts. These forms of stimuli leverage the
basic instinctual urges of the brain (which thinks its reacting to a
normal situation occurring in nature) in order to produce an overdose
effect;

*foods* saturated in sugar, fats and salts;

an endless stream of *sexual* encounters at a click;

instant and superficial *affirmation* on social media;

adventures, risk-taking and *achievement* in video games;

unlimited *novelty* and content on aggregator websites;

fast-paced-high-pitched-pure-toned *musical* rhythms;

medicated fixups that can help you *think/sleep/calm-down/hype-up/get
high/get horny/grow muscle/lose weight*,

and the list goes on.

From an evolutionary perspective, our modern skulls house a Stone Age
mind[^10]. Your brain is perfectly calibrated for (and essentially still
lives in) 40,000 BC. Unlike any naturally occurring form of sensory
input, supernormal stimuli manipulates the cues our brain receives from
the environment in order to produce a rewarding feedback to behavior
that is, in fact, detrimental; same as if you snorted cocaine causing
your brain to reaffirm your incredible "success", it will think a \$1
cheeseburger is healthy and nutritious, or that pornography increases
your chances of reproduction. Unbeknownst to our brain, we've
experienced in the past few decades a massive leap in the conditions of
our surrounding environment, and it hasn't caught up. Moreover, it is
definitively unprepared to deal with this total and unrestrained
immersion during our formative years (more on this in chapter 6).

Today, though we have comfort in excess, it isn't necessarily in our
life by active choice and we aren't necessarily better for it. We cannot
simply rely on our basic emotions, urges and instincts to guide us
towards the right path; not even the general direction. In what may very
well be the defining effort of this generation, we need to evolve
culturally to compensate for this bias.

In recent years (and for the first time in history), we've had a
massive-scale age group of teenagers reaching adulthood who've been
nurtured in an environment of supernormal stimuli. For them, who've been
raised in comfort, perseverance is not only counter-intuitive, it's
counter-conscious. Their subconscious, meant to solidify their focus and
help deal with the superabundance of input around them, relies on
rewarding easy-access stimuli instead.

But there's more to it. A single lesson that has been taught throughout
history, passed down from one generation to the next, is now forgotten.
A common truth, once the pinnacle of entering adulthood and now
abandoned.

Imagine reading a self-help book, and consciously understanding the
content. However, your behavior doesn't change. Why is that?

> *"Is there something that you can do, whose value is so high, that the
> 'fact' . . . that you're mortal, and vulnerable and prone to
> suffering---inescapably---that you would find that not only
> acceptable, but desirable; you'd say: 'I'd pay that price!'?"*[^11]
>
And it is a fact. You're mortal. You're vulnerable. You're prone to
suffering. Now ask yourself, is there something in life that you still
find worth doing **despite** that?

There is no such thing as a life without hardship. **Life** is not
designed to be comfortable, but we can earn enjoyment nonetheless. **The
Universe** is not designed for mankind's comfort, but we survive and
thrive in it nonetheless. There are many things we can't control, we get
hungry, we get tired, we get sick, we have a multitude physiological and
psychological needs, we all eventually die---and the existence of such
uncontrollable tragedies is simply a fact of life.

But you do have choice.

You can choose to experience either the hardship of exercise and diet,
or the hardship of poor health and self-image. You can choose to
experience either the hardship of studying and working hard, or the
hardship of failing among your peers and lacking funds. You can choose
to experience either the hardship of peer-pressure and scrutiny or the
hardship of a next-day hangover (and perhaps addiction). And though none
of these rewarding experiences are guarantees, hardship is, best you
chose to risk it and enjoy the effort.

Life isn't about what we can't control, it's about what we can control.
It's not about being fair, it's about making choices---action and
consequence. Choose the difficulties that are worthwhile over the
inevitabilities of stagnation (more on this in chapter 4). Pain is
unavoidable, but that does not mean it is terrible. Pain only becomes
terrible, when it is shrouded by the despair of meaninglessness.

So, do you understand now why nothing changes after you read a self-help
book? It is because simply knowing the method is not enough; the buffer
that separates you from your destination across such an effort is pain.
Information is not enough, willingness is not enough---embracing
hardship and accepting pain is what it takes. I therefore ask you again,
is there something in life that you still find worth doing **despite**
that?

If so, that is the frustration you must confront. That is the daily
resolve you muster during your MR. Use the reset to contemplate on the
life you'd agree to live despite unavoidable suffering. Although harsh,
the reality that difficulty is a condition of existence is unequivocally
**vital** to any form of self-betterment. By facing this cruel fact, you
eliminate the impalpable obstacle of self-deception. Use the fortitude
of your frustrations to confront it, allow it to arouse the vigor of
your ambition.

Such is the sense of purpose that defines the difference between
"suffering" and "despair"; the difference between the senselessness of
attempting to escape (or suppress) all forms of strain versus the
strength to posture up, face them head-on, and step forward into fear; a
warrior's ferocity of purposeful pursuit. I implore you to take a look
at your stress, confront it---choosing to thrive on it. Dare to do so
fastened with an awed appreciation for the beauty that is inherit to
such a vibrant existence.

This is the essence of the Manual Reset. More than anything else, it is
ensuring that you have a scheduled, unavoidable, set time-of-day to
pursue clarity and build up your resolve. Without it, our avoidance of
such pain confines us into a decline of incongruence, false-thinking and
false-acting---succumbing to a fantasy of an existence that is nothing
but pure pleasure (or comfort) and without pain. Such thinking is a
fallacy of hope, which only keeps one reaching out for an enslaved
lifestyle of choiceless despair.

Now, to be clear, I am by no means advocating the pursuit of avoidable
suffering. I'm simply presenting the idea that a total lack of suffering
can never be achieved. If avoidable, choosing to suffer for no purpose
is nothing short of pathological--the complete opposite of a struggled
endeavor toward a meaningful cause.

So, how exactly is this done?

Simply put, the Manual Reset must include three definitive elements to
it, but is otherwise individually constructed. These three elements are:

1.  Conducted in private.

2.  Involves difficulty.

3.  Sensory input is minimized throughout.

These three elements contain all that you need to rely on in order to
consistently return your thinking to a neutral, "undistorted" position.

For example, a Manual Reset can be waking up at 4:00am (while it is
still dark and quiet), hydrating, stretching, exercising, meditating and
planning out your day---all in private. Alternatively, it can be an
evening routine, or it can be done in the afternoon, or a combination of
the three (you get the point). If you have little to no time on your
hands you can focus on the element of hardship and take a daily plunge
into ice water. If you can't commit yourself to an intensity, you can
focus on the element of reduced sensory input and do nothing but stare
into a mirror for an hour. To reiterate, what makes a Manual Reset
effective is only that it is difficult, practiced in an environment of
minimal sensory input and done without the presence of other people. The
choice of how to balance the degree of hardship or the duration of the
reduced stimuli is at your discretion. Personally, I find that too-great
a focus on hardship is prone to failure as a result of fear, and
too-great a focus on reduced stimuli is prone failure as a result of
apathy. In any case, find something that stirs up your frustrations,
something that confronts you with your deficiencies and something that
prompts you to act. As I've said in the previous chapter, comfort
creates a cycle that seems to suppress the exact faculties necessary to
extract yourself out of it---so you can often judge the MR's
effectiveness by your aversion to it. Once you've discovered it, define
the success and failure of each day by your continued commitment toward
it, and hold on to that.

The reason the MR must be done in private (and I'll cover this further
in Chapter 8), is because our need for validation is a key component of
what keeps us locked in the social momentum of trying to please others
and not realizing our personal selves or our individual goals. Remember,
clarity and cognitive reappraisal is about addressing the frustrations
that help you discover the "self". Once you manage to sink into deep
thought during the MR, you'll immediately notice how shallow in
comparison your thinking becomes in the presence of others. You'll get
ripped out of the personal dialog you've created in the previous hours
as your mind begins to portion its resources toward ensuring you don't
do anything that may hurt your social status.

The reason the MR must be done in an environment of reduced stimuli has
to do with neuro-adaptation (which I'll cover more deeply in Chapter 6).
Basically, it affords your brain a chance to focus without being
distracted by eating, browsing the internet, listening to music et
cetera. More importantly, it is also guaranteed to stir up any stress
and frustration that your brain may have been able to subdue through its
dependence on constant stimuli. I should mention, that I don't recommend
any experience of sensory-deprivation for this. Depriving your brain of
stimuli, like in a float-tank for example, seems to me as just another
supernormal experience which our minds can't necessarily respond to
correctly. In any case, it certainly doesn't have the same effect as
hardship in a quiet and private environment does.

Similarly, the reason the MR must contain an element of hardship, is
because hardship confronts us with our inadequacy, and further demands
of us justification for electing pain. The exertion of effort will also,
of course, do a great deal to help you deal with stress and build a
tolerance for it (more in chapter 5 and 6).

Remember, it is not the Manual Reset in and of itself, that that makes
it effective. It is that your daily success and failures are **defined**
by its practice. When your contentment with yourself, when the pride you
take in your efforts is defined by this daily performance of an MR---you
are partaking in the most effective and rewarding pursuit of clarity. A
daily commitment to an MR is a daily commitment to the fact that
fundamentally, you accept that what you seek is outside of your current
capability; that you've chosen the pursuit of improving it as such. Try
as we might, no single-moment of clarity--however great--will snap us
out of years of faulty-habits. No single-commitment can be pursued in a
solely conscious manner. Such a thing would require us to instantly
master conscious thought; brandishing it, commanding it to our every
beck and call, but you've tried that already and know the result for
yourself, haven't you?

This is why, as I've said before, the solution lies in a simple
understanding, which precedes any notion of problem solving. Without
establishing a method to resolve it first, your efforts will be built
upon grounds without foundation and harder you will fall. **Maintaining
enough consciousness so as to slowly change your subconscious is
achievable, but it is not a process during which your consciousness is
absolute and never-faltering.** This is what I offer in this chapter,
and although it is not enough---it is the missing piece.

Comfort is self-perpetuating because of the strong aversions it instills
towards countermeasures. You can see, therefore, the epic nature of the
challenge ahead; your efforts require you to act in a manner directly
opposed to your inclinations--not once--but time and time again, as you
are reluctantly and unavoidably dragged back into such a mindless state
of mind. You will do this, unsupported by the faculties of clear-thought
or congruent emotion; once past the original state of desperate resolve
that drove you to act, in fact, these will all seem against you.

When Nietzsche said that what doesn't kill you makes you stronger, he
should have said, "that which hurts, may kill a part of you---making the
whole of you stronger" and then probably added, "or instead, kill a
needed part, which you'll struggle to, and perhaps never recover". But
that wasn't Nietzsche's style.

See, it's just not true that "what doesn't kill us makes us stronger".

Take, for example, skin that's been exposed to frequent pressure and
friction--it will callus and harden. If amputated however, does the limb
grow back better-than-ever? Of course not.

Devastating societal hardship may set the conditions for some few, very
unique individuals to overcome them; the rest of us just come back from
deployment with PTSD. There is no glory in meaningless suffering, and it
should not be pursued. Stress that's far beyond the limits of what you
can handle will almost certainly break you.

Never feel that you have to over-compensate after an egregious failure.
Regardless of success or failure, your mission stays the same. Trying to
emotionally overload yourself will only burn you out; it fogs up your
thought process and can be wrongfully used to justify a relapse.
Regardless of results, your mission stays the same. Don't let
yesterday's results affect today's motivation, not if you've just failed
nor if you're on a 100-day streak. Your mission stays the same every
morning: "Manually reset, Warrior".

Though pain is unavoidable, we do (to some extent) have the choice of
which measures of pain we accept into our lives. Choose wisely, choose
clearly, and find a purpose based on that. You do not have to become
at-once everything you've ever wanted in order to achieve it, simply
continue to remind yourself that you are frustrated, that you will not
settle for how things currently are, until you get there. Never allow
yourself to feel wholeheartedly comfortable in your current state, only
grateful, desiring and urgent; therein lies the potential for true
change.

Comfort, is a man-made construct that only describes our perception of
our position, relative to our expectation of what should be. In a life
pursued outside an expectation of ease, the most subtle grace suddenly
became rapture, and the most deeply masked want---a fervent will.


KIND HEARTED WEAKNESS 
=====================
# CHAPTER THREE

Growing up, my father had taught us that most important was to simply
"be a good person". This idea had resonated well with my young-self and
by his example I learned to implement it as a fail-safe for moral
impeccability. To my impressionable mind, the lesson was clear--listen
to your heart; use your feelings of sympathy, humility and affection to
ensure that your actions are justified.

Yet several years later I came across a contradiction. Gradually, as I
read the (distinctly different) personal accounts written by Viktor
Frankl and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, my perception of human
kindheartedness transformed. Both of these men had experienced some of
the most horrific brutality ever to have been perpetrated by mankind,
yet somehow they had both similarly concluded that, in fact, the real
nature of human cruelty was **sympathetic**. They concluded that the
characteristics of evil were, in fact, the ones we usually associate
with weak character: **conformity**, **irresponsibility** and
**inauthenticity**.

Solzhenitsyn was a great Russian writer, he wrote a three-volume book
called *The Gulag Archipelago* that was instrumental in bringing down
the Soviet Union (and he was awarded the Nobel prize in literature for
it in 1970). In it, he recounts the experiences of imprisonment in the
gulag labor camps during the totalitarian era of Stalin's Russia.

Much like Victor Frankl, a Jewish psychiatrist who had survived three
Nazi concentration camps, he was convinced that the reason the horrors
of the kinds seen in the Soviet Union, Nazi Germany (and comparatively
Mao's China, the Cambodian massacre, the Armenian genocide, the Rwandan
genocide, the Indonesian killings of '65-'66, Sri-Lanka's civil war,
modern-day North Korea, et cetera) took place---the death and torture of
hundreds of millions of people---was in fact an unavoidable result of
the inauthenticity perpetuated by the individuals who made up those
societies in their own use of thought and speech. Fundamentality, they
concluded that evil can manifest and then further sustain itself
**only** when individuals give up their **responsibility** to determine
the **truth** **for** **themselves** and **act** **on it**.

> *"And the simple step of a simple courageous man is not to partake in
> falsehood, not to support false actions! . . . no sooner will
> falsehood be dispersed than the nakedness of violence will be revealed
> in all its ugliness---and violence, decrepit, will fall . . . One word
> of truth shall outweigh the whole world!"*[^12]
>
Through the simple act of individuals conforming, their actions that are
themselves pathological transform the entire state into moral sickness.
The failure of existential self-understanding creates a hole that is
often filled instead with dangerous ideology. Guided by the unwavering
determination of these great men (and many others like them) I'd been
impressed with the contention that conformity to a notion was, in a
sense, no better than actively supporting it, and arguably more cowardly
and cruel. Moreover, the generalized irresponsible thoughtlessness
characterizing conformity was the exact kind of behavior that invited
such atrocities to occur in the first place.

Take for example, the past eight years, in which more than 164,000
people have lost their lives in drug related violence in Mexico[^13].
These numbers are easily equivocal to the loss of life expected from an
active civil war, and yet a vast majority of these casualties are
innocent civilians caught up in the drug transportation industry,
transferring illegal substances through Mexico to the US. Because it's
illegal, absolute control of the geographic borders is necessary in
order to provide a guaranteed timely supply of these products to the
most demanding market in the world. Ask yourself this: without an
outrageous demand for an incredibly complex and illegal organizational
structure, would this extreme measure of control necessary not be
significantly reduced? With legislation aligned with the public
perception of what can and cannot be consumed, would we not have
regulations in place to enforce appropriate non-violent business
practices?

I'm not condoning nor am I condemning the use of drugs, what I'm
denouncing instead is the **clear contrast between our personal beliefs
and behavior as a public**. It is only with the combined demand, and the
equally drastic lack of willingness to represent that demand in law that
such a tragedy exists absent the critique necessary to put an end to it.

> *"In passive acceptance of the inconsistencies between our policies of
> prohibition and our actual behavior of tolerance (or even
> encouragement of consumption) we become accomplices."* [^14]
>
Solzhenitsyn challenged: how much of the behavior and personality which
you project is authentically you? Ask yourself whether or not you often
change your actions out of feelings of self-consciousness? Is it
possible that you even lie to yourself, so as to not face a reality that
can sometimes feel intolerable?

Such a form of morality---justified only by a sentimental urge---is
nothing short of indirect cruelty.

Moreover, the resolution to live instead doing yourself justice in this
manner, might be the single most positive and impactful deed you can
bestow in your lifetime. True **morality**, and perhaps even true
fulfillment in a world that can often seem unfair and outside our
control, is taking **personal responsibility** for what is under our
control.

Such is the claim made by phenomenologists, existential
psychotherapists, humanists and stoics throughout history who further
use authenticity, the use of reason and the bearing of personal
responsibility as the ultimate markers of positive mental health and
morality.

Solomon Asch, with experiments[^15] originally carried out in the 1950s
and well-replicated since, highlighted this phenomenon now known as
conformity; and (perhaps more importantly) discovered its counteragent.

Asch placed individuals in a room alongside multiple actors conforming
to a notion that was clearly incorrect. For example, he would ask the
group to determine which object of three presented is biggest---and all
actors would point to the item that was visibly smallest instead.
Amazingly, a whopping 75%-90% of the time participating test-subjects
joined in with the rest of the group and subscribed to the overt fallacy
as well.

When asked why they chose an answer that was so clearly mistaken,
subjects often responded innocently, shrugging off their responsibility
to inquire with claims such as "I thought I must have been wrong" or "I
couldn't imagine everyone else choosing incorrectly".

But Asch didn't stop there. He then decided to add a dissenter to the
mix; just one other person who, instead, gave the correct answer, or
even an incorrect answer that was different from the group\'s incorrect
answer. Astonishingly, Asch discovered that this modification hugely
reduced the test-subjects' conformity down to a mere 5-10%.

In choosing dissent over conformity, we hold the power to drastically
overturn the most atrocious of moral conditions. Morality cannot be made
foolproof with a thoughtless clinging to being "a good person"; it
requires fortitude, accountability and a willingness to contradict in
the name of what may not "feel" is right, but objectively is.

This is the moral standard that is derived from choosing an **honest,
rational address** over "emotional kindheartedness". I believe it to be
quite clear that qualifying as a "good person" therefore, demands the
moral fortitude to resolve to be this way. The mark of well-intentioned
evil, is the confusing of emotions with morality. Goodness is not a
state you can reach comfortably, it isn't status-quo. It requires
effort, drive and unavoidably---hardship. Goodness is having the
capacity and strength to be evil and choosing instead to oppose it.

"But surely", you might say, "I can tell whether or not I am being
influenced, and I would never condone or participate in any form of
cruelty". Perhaps, but the evidence is to the contrary. Researchers have
discovered that it takes a minority of just five percent to influence a
crowd's direction---and that the other 95 percent follow without
realizing it.[^16] It turns out, that people who can\'t differentiate
between \'self\' and \'group\' are most likely to go with the flow;
those not exerting their individual cognition or paying attention. These
people, according to researchers, tend to lose a sense of personal moral
beliefs.[^17]

> *"It is quite evident that crowds are too impulsive and too mobile to
> be moral . . . Our savage, destructive instincts are the inheritance
> left dominant in all of us from the primitive ages. In the life of the
> isolated individual it would be dangerous for him to gratify these
> instincts, while is absorption in an irresponsible crowd, in which in
> consequence he is assured of impunity, gives him entire liberty to
> follow them."*[^18]
>
While no public opinion polls existed at the time, some historians
estimate that in 1938 over ninety percent of Germans were \"believers in
the Führer\"[^19]. If we can't face the fact that at least some of the
same emotions that led those Germans to such behavior exist in us as
well, then we can't honestly claim to know ourselves or the nature of
our morality at all, now can we?

In 1973, in an article[^20] written by S. S. Wilson, it was determined
that a man on a bicycle can go four times faster than a pedestrian, but
use one fifth the energy in the process. At the time, he determined that
through this combined use of both his own physical ability and the
bicycle as a tranducer, man outstrips the **efficiency** of **all
machines** and **all other animals** as well. And though it was later
found out that this efficiency-record of ours has been beaten by baleen
whales[^21], the point stands; man achieves greatness by combining his
own individual ability with peripheral tools. These tools, of course,
will never be inherently good or inherently bad, only defined by the way
in which we wield them. Therefore, the onus is on us to become as
capable as the tools we wield; to be as strong, both in moral fortitude
and ability. More than ever, in this day-and-age of spectacular tools,
the choice between carelessness and self-betterment will be more
consequential than ever before.

> *"You may of course ask whether we really need to refer to 'saints'.
> Wouldn\'t it suffice just to refer to 'decent people'? It is true that
> they form a minority. More than that, they always will remain a
> minority. And yet I see therein the very challenge to join the
> minority. For the world is in a bad state, but everything will become
> still worse unless each of us does his best.*
>
> *So, let us be alert --- alert in a twofold sense:*
>
> *Since Auschwitz **we know what man is capable of**.*
>
> *And since Hiroshima **we know what is at stake**."*[^22]
>
These men I've referenced earlier in this chapter, dedicated their lives
to try and teach us that though life does not exist without hardship, it
can still be meaningful and worthwhile. They demanded and encouraged us
to be responsible and authentic, not only for our own sake but for the
sake of the whole. One cannot repudiate the truth in their words, only
ignore it. These standards that they've preached are ones that they've
upheld themselves many times over; I find that truly inspiring.

In his pursuit of strength, I proclaim that the Comfort Warrior is not
only justified in his efforts---he is morally obligated to them. There
is no merit in kindhearted weakness that is solely prone to the
undisciplined whims of unreasonable sentiment. Pursuing the same
strength that enables us to do wrong, but choosing instead to use such
strength for good is the true mark of such a warrior; an anti-bully,
carrying burdens that are not his own, filled to brim with the will to
stand up and fight for that which he finds just.

I found that for myself, comfort had stripped away my willingness to
protest. Not only was I often saturated in a pervasive degree of apathy,
but it had also driven me to weakness and a fear confrontation. So I
concluded: no matter how common and 'normal seeming' emotional fragility
was around me---it was not justified. As I took my first steps in the
pursuit of clarity, I determined that without strength I could not be
moral.


RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 
===================
# CHAPTER FOUR

You understand now the principle of using the MR as a daily indicator of
success or failure as well as the moral imperative of self-betterment.
Once you've established that baseline, it is time to build upon it using
the clarity gained by its practice. If you haven't already, I suggest
that you now start to implement an MR, and further use the clarity it
bestows to structure your day. Personally, I do this through the use of
unconditional rules.

> *"The one thing I admire about people who have strong nutrition
> beliefs is their dogmatic behavior. For example, a vegetarian, under
> no circumstances, will ever eat meat. There is no, 'well, everyone
> else is having a burger, so just this once, I will too.' That's not
> how it works."*[^23]

First, let's make one thing clear: these rules are building blocks, they
**do not** determine your daily success or failure. The pursuit of
clarity is, and will always be, the primary struggle of a Comfort
Warrior. The MR is fundamental to establishing a baseline upon which you
can build yourself up, everything else is secondary. However, these
rules are still unconditional and should therefore be carefully
calibrated within your stress tolerance. "Cold turkey" doesn't work;
only through the sustained clarity gained by the consistent practice of
the MR and an ever-increasing tolerance to stress, can you build
yourself up using this figurative "step ladder" of unconditional rules.

Second, these rules **can** be modified, with one crucial caveat: they
can only be modified **during** or **immediately after** an MR.
Essentially, these rules are the constant adjustments you make to your
life based on your thinking and self-discovery during the MR. They are
only unconditional in the sense that once the MR is complete they no
longer require a justification. Rather, you simply comply and
follow-through with these rules because they are rules.

Now, I assume that we are all adults here. In case of an emergency, it
is fair to assume that you best trust your judgement and make a decision
based on the current circumstances. Got it? Good, that concludes my
disclaimer.

I'll explain the reasoning behind this practice. As a daily practitioner
of the MR, you recognize that your ability to reason throughout the rest
of your day is compromised. This is the entire premise of its practice
after all---maintaining enough consciousness so as to slowly change your
subconscious is achievable, but it is not a process during which your
consciousness is absolute and never-faltering. Nevertheless, you still
require a tool in your arsenal to enable you to correct ruinous
behaviors and avoid mistakes during this period of faulty thinking. By
reflecting on these faults during the MR and finding solutions to them,
you can implement unconditional rules that do not require you to hold on
to the reasoning justifying them while in their practice, and achieve
exactly that.

For example, let's say you've been diagnosed with high blood-pressure.
You may then implement some rules regarding diet and exercise in order
to correct the original behavior which caused it. And though you may
disregard the importance of a healthy level of arterial pressure in your
systemic circulation later when making lunch choices, by simply
following the diet rules that you've set earlier, you do not require you
to keep that reasoning in mind---you simply eat healthy because that is
your personal rule.

Quite astonishingly, through the practice of unconditional rules, I've
found that after sufficient repetition these rules took willpower out of
the equation. Besides a general increased tolerance to stress, I was
also finding that I could expand my discipline further simply because
the activities that used to drain my willpower no longer did. This was
an incredible sign; it meant that my new habits required little to no
cognitive effort and have been embraced by my subconscious. Can you
believe it? Before I knew it, I was winning against my
previously-unknown enemy. I was inclined to produce effort, to endure
hardship, and to seek personal betterment. It became an integral part of
my life, and even if I tried to avoid it, the need to follow through was
always in the back of my mind; like an itch that needed to be scratched.
I was enticed to better myself without an allocation of resolve.

An additional benefit to the implementation of an unconditional ruleset
is that it provides a significant buffer impeding the relapses in your
efforts that you will unavoidably experience. As opposed to the MR,
failing at any of your rules does not constitute total failure.
Therefore, your rules allow for a delayed regression that lasts up to
the moment where you snap out of it, mustering the focus to "hit the
brakes" and return to your routine. I cannot stress enough how important
this aspect of your ruleset is. You'll see for yourself once you've
implemented more than one or two rules that rather than hitting rock
bottom, you'll be far more likely to experience only minor slip-ups
(such as missing a workout or a deadline). Although the reasons behind a
relapse are often emotional, they are usually provoked by physical
circumstances. Having rules that shape these physical circumstances will
enable you oftentimes to leverage your mistakes into a continuously
better-calibrated ruleset.

Now, it is your own personal responsibility to shape these rules in a
way that you deem is beneficial, and I am therefore hesitant to instruct
you any further on their conception. That being said, I will suggest
these rudimentary guidelines in order to keep you from making some basic
mistakes that I've made: 1. Keep your rules focused, concise and
well-defined. 2. Write your rules down and review them daily. 3.
Maintain a space below your current ruleset listing rules that are "next
on the agenda" (i.e. you would like to add them on, but you don't yet
have a strong enough grasp on your current ruleset).

It is also important to note that although you are certain to fail at
these rules at one point to another, realize that there is a significant
difference between such a blunder and **elected failure**. There will be
times in which, by comparison, choosing the continued enforcement of
your rules will seem hypocritical. However, this is faulty-logic and
constitutes nothing more than a self-deception trap.

For example, suppose you implemented a rule to never use the internet
before 10am on any given day, but on occasion failed at this rule by
succumbing to the temptation of checking up on the latest social media
content. In reflection of this, your mother's request for a Skype call
on Saturday mornings may seem mean-spirited to decline. After all, if
you've broken this rule for Facebook, how can you not for your own
mother?

Or suppose you subscribe to the notion of intermittent fasting and made
a rule that you will not eat after 5:30pm or before 9:30am every
day---though the vending machines at work do occasionally get the better
of you. This is not comparable with a friend's request for you to join
him for a late night drinking session, and does not somehow justify
intentional failure. Though exceptions can be made for these rules,
those can only be included during (or immediately after) the MR. Outside
of this timeframe, these rules are unconditional and that is reason
enough for them to be upheld.

In both examples, the former and latter causes for failure are
distinctly different. Although the former circumstances may have been of
far less importance, they were circumstances in which you **failed** and
do not excuse in the least any future **choice** of similar behavior.

You'll note, that for circumstances similar to ones mentioned above, it
may be very hard for the people around you to accept your changed
behavior. Prepare for this, I strongly encourage you to explain and
share with them the reasons for your actions. Be sure of yourself,
confident and assertive; muster up your determination, be clear, explain
with brevity and verve so as to give them the opportunity to support you
in your efforts. As I've warned before, changing your behavior will come
at a cost, and still it is selfless, morally justified and will
ultimately benefit you and your loved ones alike. Stay consistent, true
to yourself and pursue any measure of clarity that helps you understand
what that is. Ultimately, changing yourself is not possible without
changing the conditions that led you to rock bottom in the first place.
You must be prepared to adjust these influences of your environment
(more in Chapters 7 and 8).

As your efforts continue, your tolerance and ability will improve as
well, your moments of weakness will become less frequent and the impact
of their occurrence will diminish. As you feel more ready, clear-headed
and armed with a better grasp of yourself and your wants, you will have
tools to move onward to greater aspirations by further implementation to
your ruleset.

For example, after practicing some rudimentary rules for a while
revolving exercise, you may discover that in regards to the benefits of
sleep--consistency is a significant factor[^24]. As a result, you may
then decide to establish a rule to stick to a consistent sleep
schedule---even during the weekends---in order to improve certain
factors such as muscle recovery and energy levels; thus further
benefitting your original efforts of fitness.

These rules can very often serve to support each other, acting like
building blocks of discipline. If you say, for instance, have a rule to
do 45 minutes of cardio five times a week and another to eat no more
than 2 fruits a day, you're avoiding the possibility of eating 6 bananas
in one sitting, the resulting insulin comatose, and a potentially
diminished eagerness to go out for that run.

These rules are the hardship that you elect over the inevitable despair
that will come as a consequence of forgoing it. They are the instruction
to embrace discomfort instead of postponing it, thereby reaping future
rewards. They are your cognitively imposed behavioral construct, setting
a guideline that is not influenced by anything that occurs below your
level of awareness. In an environment no longer driven by necessity,
they are the stronghold that fortifies the clarity of your resolve. They
are what makes the difference between forced-obedience and
self-discipline.


STRIVE
======
# CHAPTER FIVE

My role in the war had just begun--and I was tired. Was hinging it all
on desperation truly enough? I'd only hoped. But it didn't matter much,
to be honest. I was determined to give it my all and this was it.

I knew less then than you've learned by now, and so I am not convinced
that any more on that account would further prompt you to act. I'll
share with you now instead the experiences of battles fought and lessons
learned---the continued tale of a war story; and perhaps, if you've
chosen to dare, one that's not exclusively my own.

\-\--

Before long, something happened. As I discovered myself, I discovered
someone already driven. "My god", it occurred to me, "there was no need
to attain spirit, only unleash it". A unique and passionate flame was
roaring inside me all along and it wasn't until I'd removed the layers
of comfort suffocating it that it surfaced. It came hand-in-hand with
the stress that I had unearthed. It came hand-in-hand with the
difficulty that I had embraced. It came hand-in-hand with my newfound
sense of self.

For my entire life, I've thought of motivation as the short-lasting
bursts of energy one might get every so often. In regards to my
ambitions, I thought it was impossible to consistently "feel like it".
But in reality, passion was an inherent sense of drive that could
consistently be called-upon and lived-by through the confronting,
manipulating, and thriving off of stress.

> *"And then it happened. I started taking guys down five, six times in
> a row. At the end of some of our fights, there'd be holes in the
> walls. It was total chaos. Bodies would fly all over the place. But it
> was over, and somehow I had won. Baffled, they'd turn and ask, "Who
> the hell is that kid?" Like in a cartoon strip.*
>
> *The thing I had to learn, and I keep learning this lesson in my life
> every day, is how to take the fear's power and use it to become
> better."*[^25]
>
Ask yourself, do you fear? Do you want? Are they one in the same and do
you avoid them both? Do suffocate them with comfort instead? As I've
said earlier, I believe that the only way you can reach such a condition
is if you have a tremendous, deep-seated desire already burning within
you. This passion leaves you with one of two options: achieve, or
desperately suppress; it is the unique circumstance from which arise
both the detriment and awesome potential of the Comfort War endeavor.

Leaving your stress ungratified by stimuli is the single, most impactful
inspiration tool at the disposal of the Comfort Warrior. His fears,
doubts and frustrations are at the core of his being---and by
discovering them---he can make their power his own.

See, stress is inherently there so it can be used to your advantage;
this is the purpose of the stress response. When your brain detects a
stressful situation, a series of interactions between your endocrine
glands in the brain and kidneys (called the HPA axis) cause the release
of the cortisol, adrenaline and norepinephrine hormones (among others)
into your body in order to **prime you for immediate action**. This
reaction is meant to benefit you by elevating your heart rate and giving
you a burst of focus and energy---it even boosts your immune
system[^26]---so you can better address the situation at hand.

But we don't see it this way, do we?

The problem, as mentioned earlier, is that we use **thought
suppression** rather than **cognitive reappraisal** to deal with our
feeling this way. It doesn't resolve anything, only postpones---making
matters worse. By not addressing the issue which created the stress in
the first place, you are likely only to increase the frequency of such
detested stress in your life.

The effects of chronic stress can be so devastating in fact, that not
only can it lead to significant changes in the size of our brain[^27]
(further reducing our ability to deal with stress), it can even cause
epigenetic changes (prioritizing the expression of some genes over
others) which have been further shown to transfer from parents to
offspring for many generations thereafter[^28].

Now, ready for the kicker?

Stress kills, but only if you think it does; perception changes
everything. Test subjects who were encouraged to reappraise stress
arousal as functional and adaptive exhibited increased perceptions of
available resources, improved cardiovascular functioning, and less
threat-related attentional bias. Their heart was still racing, but it
was perceived as the priming of their senses and was determined
physiologically to be within the condition of healthy cardiovascular
performance. These measurements, in fact, were incredibly similar to our
physiological reactions during moments of joy and courage[^29].

> *"I learned that courage was not the absence of fear, but the triumph
> over it."*[^30]

In stressful situations, signs of increased arousal (e.g., racing heart)
are frequently construed as anxiety, nervousness, or fear. For instance,
panic attacks are characterized by a "fear of fear"[^31]---fear in
response to somatic sensations. But that isn't the end of the
story---the arousal of the senses is what we make it to be. As GSP said,
learn to take fear's power and use it to become better.

And just in case you're concerned with the detrimental effects that
chronic stress may have already had on the size your hippocampus, can
you guess what the best proven methods are to revert such an impact?
Exercise and meditation[^32]. Sounds a lot like a Manual Reset, doesn't
it?

I make the following case: the most intense of emotions are inherently
taxing. Not only do stress and frustration require effort to contain,
but even moments of great joy can often be difficult to bear; they too
are strenuous and demand enduring. Is the fear of cliff diving not a
thrill? Is the long awaited re-uniting with a loved one not heart
wrenching? I argue that to use comfort to nullify your experience when
you are distraught, is to nullify your capacity to experience in the
first place. I argue that both difficulty and joy are conditions of
restlessness that are an integral part of the human condition. To subdue
one is to subdue the other; the subduing of life itself.

We use comfort to suppress any form of heightened experience, we elect
instead to live a dull, numbed life separated from our inherent sense of
will by many attenuating layers of ease. Is it so surprising therefore
that by limiting our capacity to handle stress, we limit our potential
to bear a profound experience? To thrive on stress is to thrive on life.

I argue that this is not new, and that we've always wanted hardship.
What's new is that for the first time, we aren't unavoidably forced to
it in abundance. I argue that the Comfort Warrior is but the canary in
the coal mine, and that before long, many will notice that their
capacity to live has been diminished. It can start with something as
simple as using food to dull your depression, and before you know it, to
dull feelings of excitement[^33]. Human nature is to want thrill, to
want arousal; human nature is to want, and to do so with effort.

> *"The ease becomes so great, that it becomes altogether too great;
> then there is only one want left, though it is not yet a felt want,
> when people will want difficulty."*[^34]
>
In his book *Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience*[^35] Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi compiles four decades of research alongside thousands
of interviews conducted all over the world to try and understand the
nature of what he calls "optimal experience". He discovered astounding
similarities between people's descriptions of their greatest moments of
joy from all across the globe, and that these moments came as a result
of unusual investments of attention and effort. Therefore, by
compromising our ability to be attentive through cheap indulgence, is it
not clear that we compromise our ability to enjoy life itself?

Happiness isn't achieved through the pursuit of that which makes us feel
comfortable, desensitized or overly stimulated. It **ensues**, within a
framework of **fulfillment**, which is achieved through the act of
**embracing** **personal responsibility** for that which is within our
control--in a world that often seems too powerful to give us a say.
This, is what we often search for when we say that we are looking for
"meaning" in life. It's the genuine, natural thrill of standing tall in
the face of life's difficulty, if only for the sake of so significant a
purpose, that we've deemed hardship to be worthwhile.

> *"But I don\'t want comfort. I want God, I want poetry, I want real
> danger, I want freedom, I want goodness. I want sin."*[^36]

In fact, not only is some measure of discomfort unavoidable, it can be
beneficial. In their book *Willpower: Rediscovering the Greatest Human
Strength*[^37], Prof. Roy F. Baumeister and John Tierney make the case
that willpower is like a muscle that can be strengthened through use.
For example, practices of discomfort such as intermittent fasting, have
been shown to be capable of favorably influencing an array of
cardiometabolic health indices[^38]---many practitioners of which, have
testified online that this was a result of an overall improvement to
their sense of discipline, not simply due to a reduced caloric
intake--albeit our knowledge on this is still very limited.

The philosophy of such practices (introducing low doses of stress to
increase strength and resilience) is known as Hormetism[^39], and is
based on the biological phenomena of Hormesis whereby beneficial effects
can result from low exposure to an otherwise toxic agent. We see this in
sunlight exposure, immunotherapy, chemistry, and many other areas.

Ask yourself, if you had the option of having your brain wired to a
sense of pleasure (one that was cocaine induced, for example), would you
agree to be subjected to such a thing for the rest of your life? Perhaps
you would, but I would argue that if you didn't---whichever alternative
you've found to be more desireable is extraordinarily meaningful and
worthwhile.

I would argue that it is this pursuit that defines our attempts at
victory in the Comfort War, transitioning from one extreme to another. A
balanced living; quality of life alongside the clear sense of clarity
and control over our thinking. Comfort in and of itself, has never been
a pursuit of progress; simply a shifting to the antipole of an
experience-based spectrum. Yet if a median way were to be reached, the
resultant ability to balance desires alongside aversions in the pursuit
of self-discovery can be described as nothing short of enlightenment.

It is useful to assume that we underestimate the potential for sensory
intensity. It's an interesting notion; that we can get so disconnected,
even from our own personal moments of climax, so as to somehow discount
the memory itself as being anything more than mundane. True joy as an
accomplishment is often assumed to be exaggerated, despite the fact that
mystical explanations are not necessary to account for the performance
of a talented musician, or a great athlete, despite the fact that most
of us could not even begin to approach their prowess. It's an idea so
difficult to review objectively, especially whilst saturated in
lackluster normalcy, but have we not all, at one time or another apexed
beyond expectation? Are such notions of experience truly so farfetched?

Yet we are, of course, also equally familiar with fabricated tales of
bliss and extravagant myths of the supernatural. There exists a
tremendous incentive to prophesize of stupendous enlightenment where
there is none. "Just continue on for a little while longer, eventually
you'll realize it was true all along"---yeah, right. Much like the
account of alien abductees and subjects of hypnosis, there is good
reason to approach with skepticism, and assume these uncanny feats are
nothing but lies that an overly receptive mind tells itself. Wanting to
believe can at times lead us to believe, and that is no small danger. It
is also worth pointing out that sometimes we even consider the excessive
domination of positive emotional states themselves as mental
illness---commonly known as Mania.

Nevertheless, it is still possible that the nature of certain
experiences cannot be reduced to words in any way that is analogous,
relevant or even meaningful. Therefore, at the risk of sounding a
trickster, I'd like to account of such an experience. With enough
repetition, past the small, ever-occurring barriers of pain, lies true
bliss.

> *"The most intense conflicts, if overcome, leave behind a sense of
> security and calm that is not easily disturbed. It is just these
> intense conflicts and their conflagration which are needed to produce
> valuable and lasting results.\"*[^40]

From my own experience, great efforts are met with great outcomes.
Though you may find that you have no say in the matter, the labors
produced by the necessity of self-conquering are tremendously rewarding.
At the deepest trenches of fatigue, after some time in which you've
built your tolerance, skill and capacity---lies marvelous thrill.

My theory is that this happens unnaturally. I think that it is an
experience exclusive to mankind, exclusive to consciousness. To overcome
your urges, to hold your ground as they wash over you, seems like an
achievement of cognition exclusive to those who are not tied down by
their instinct. The reason I say this, is because you first notice it in
the subtleties; as though the joy is sourced in your awareness. It may
simply be that attentiveness is improved---thus enhancing all other
modes of joy---or perhaps that in the ability to "notice life", to be
aware of it, despite the blindness ushered by your inner-caveman (or
cavewoman) lies greater fulfillment. I'm not sure, but that is certainly
how it feels; unnatural.

> *"Somewhere along the line we seem to have confused comfort with
> happiness. Dostoyevsky had it right: \'Suffering is the sole origin of
> consciousness.\' Never are my senses more engaged than when the pain
> sets in. There is a magic in misery. Just ask any runner."*[^41]

Relishing in a whiff of an intense memory, the welling of empathy at the
sound of an outcry, blood boiling at the sight of a fine work of art;
it's the opposite of desensitization, it is controlled and clear-minded
sensitization, it is the synthesis of intellect and emotion at work; it
is optimal experience. Relaxed, firm and arduous composure---calm vigor;
Caravaggio's Judith as she beheads Holofernes.

In any case, life becomes self-enforcing. If not treasured before, it
certainly will be past this point. The suffering and difficulty equate
to meaning and challenge. Depression and nihilism make way to
fulfillment and confidence. Though a daily MR still remains a great
challenge for a long while, for once, you'll finally be able relish in
its usefulness for the duration of its practice.

This capacity to endure, I believe, is the ultimate expression of
control in your life. Though still far out of your reach, any
circumstance that can be at your discretion become so. Uncertainty is no
longer tyrant, it is only a consideration.

As you progress, this sense of control becomes more and more
rattling---as a result of your increased composure and ability to
tolerate stress, you'll discover in the endurance of pain an unveiling
of sensations so raw and sharp they are almost maddening in effect.
You'll meet new challenges and work to overcome them. Your skill will
improve as you're confronted with greater challenges. While the balance
between your skills and effort remains, their capacity enlarges and your
experience along with it.

It is on the absolute brink of fatigue, through sheer force of will and
comfort-less calm that the subtleties become vivid and piercing. Your
ability to perceive it is no longer eroded by excessive stimuli. The
more time you spend in this state, the greater your ability to sustain
it becomes; as you push yourself further toward the precipice of focused
depletion, these sensations stack and amplify---reaching ecstasy. And
that's where the word ecstasy comes from, by the way, the original Greek
*ekstasis* describes the perception of "standing outside oneself".

This is the ultimate warrior quality. It is why militant critical skill
operators are known less for their physical abilities and more for their
functional capacity during total-loss. Which doesn't sound like much
fun, right? But you start craving this daily hardship, this challenge
quota. You become obsessed with it---obsessed with life---true to your
ostensibly passionate nature. Lacking ease does not become opposed to
lacking enjoyment, it does not become opposed to lacking fulfillment, it
does not becomes opposed to lacking pleasure or satisfaction---on the
contrary, you'll likely experience these far more frequently and
vividly.

> *"The only easy day was yesterday."*[^42]

It's a state which I believe to be the synergetic epitome between our
primitive needs and our cognitive reassessment of such experiences.

Wouldn't it be wonderful if one day all your efforts had culminated into
one, singular event?

> *"Note to self:*
>
> *Now I'm trembling. Standing in a whirlwind. Catching my breath.*
>
> *This is rapture.*
>
> *A perfect storm; calm in the center.*
>
> *So vivid are the colors, their edges so vibrantly defined. *
>
> *The world is truly boiling."*
>
---

The final point I'd like to make in this chapter on strive, is on the
practicality of elected hardship. The Greats will tell you "not to
overthink it" and to just "go for it", but for some this simply isn't an
option. Pain may start off simple, but once it has developed into a
complex beast, it may need to be thought through. Though (as I've
mentioned in chapter 2) one must come to terms with the fact that the
pursuit of life is synonymous with enduring hardship---and while true
and very important---in the face of great pain this logical
understanding often isn't enough to bear such a weight.

You may stand there preparing to elect hardship, considering the moral
obligation to pursue strength, the desperation you've experienced thus
far, that pain is unavoidable and temporary, and yet the fear of it
still grips and overcomes you. You may face this alone, and bear alone
the responsibility to overcome it. And so, nothing that I will write
here will provide knowledge enough for it not to require your own doing,
it's important you understand that.

However, I will say this: while enduring pain does not become easier,
you do get used to it. I know, initially that may not make a whole lot
of sense, but know that it at least means that the aversion to pain that
you experience right now is at the greatest point it ever will be. With
time, difficulty can even become enjoyable in a way. Sooner than you may
think, you'll find yourself craving the intensity, the focus and the
challenge. And though there's no escaping the fact that right now you
have to go against your nature in order to confront it, this will not
always be the case. Remember that the idea that hardship is unavoidable
isn't nearly as powerful as the feeling of it. If you're able to look
back on your life and the pain you've experienced thus far, you may gain
a perspective and realization that you are already filled with so much
hurt that this challenge before you is insignificant in comparison.

Some, though their hardship is guaranteed, will never face such pain.
And though it is useful, they can accomplish great deeds without it.
There is an inherent beauty to pain that is different than simple
hardship, a tenacity if you will; a dead man's grip. The paintings of
Vincent Van Gogh versus those of Jacques-Louis David. The composing of
Ludwig Von Beethoven versus that of Wolfgang Mozart. The writings of
Kurt Vonnegut versus those of L. Frank Baum. The chess games of Bobby
Fischer versus those of Magnus Carlsen. Comparably, one is not greater
than the other; but if you look closely, the beauty of desperation is
apparent.

> *"The most beautiful people we have known are those who have known
> defeat, known suffering, known struggle, known loss, and have found
> their way out of the depths. These persons have an appreciation, a
> sensitivity, and an understanding of life that fills them with
> compassion, gentleness, and a deep loving concern. Beautiful people do
> not just happen."*[^43]
>
In his book *Antifragile: Things That Gain From Disorder*[^44] Prof.
Nassim Nicholas Taleb makes the case that often what differentiates
between a living organism and everything that is not living is whether
they have a great potential to gain from disorder. Of course there are
limits to this, but Prof. Taleb sees life as in a condition that is
opposed to fragility: it decays in static rest. When an event has very
little downside potential and enormous upside potential, life's pursuit
of chaos bears fruit. People, similarly, who have nothing to lose, can
rattle the world.

But perhaps more significantly, the knowing of great pain often bears
further. In his book *Practical Ethics*[^45] Peter Singer has argued
that we have a moral obligation to help those suffering from famine.
This moral obligation is rooted in the concept of beneficence, an
alleged moral principle. Singer formulates this obligation in the
following manner: \"if it is in our power to prevent something very bad
happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral
significance, we ought to do it.\" He argues that the concept of
beneficence requires that everyone\'s necessity is morally prior to
anyone\'s luxury, and thus we are morally required to attend to
everyone\'s absolute necessities before attending to our own luxuries.

The main criticism to this view, however, is that such a moral standard
could never be reasonably expected to be upheld by society, and
therefore fails to achieve any sort of usefulness[^46]. Is it really
practical to expect that all the sudden, society will give up all forms
of luxury for the sake of others?

Regardless of whether or not you agree with Singer's view, I'd like to
focus for a moment on this opposition. The case that they are making is
that it is possible for something to be morally righteous, but that this
righteousness is negated by its lacking feasibility. Though I'll admit,
that is a mature and realistic point of view---does it not place an
incredible burden on us to pursue the capacity to bear moral
responsibility?

When we are confronted with pain, especially when it has been elected by
choice, I find that it is impossible not to be horrified by the thought
of the countless individuals who are inflicted by pain that is far
worse, with no say in the matter. Although, I'll admit, I am not capable
enough to bear their burden at the moment, I certainly will pursue that
course with every ounce of my dignity. Though this claim in other cases
may seem laughable, any objective view will certainly conclude that
there is nothing more important than working to prevent this tragedy of
others. In the face of critique, the hard truth is that a perspective
not earned through pain is prone to sympathy that is hypocritical.

I've often seen those who thought that through the desensitization of
such feeling of empathy, humility and care, they made themselves
stronger. They thought that to be heartless is to be strong, but never
confronted their true weakness. Though they attempted to forgo all
emotion---anger, pride and resentment stayed behind. In reality, they
were ruled by their emotions, and could not see it.

To conclude, the story of this chapter is that something lies beyond
pain---and that is incredible beauty. It is a beauty that is earned
through desperation, and thus, is incomparable. It is a beauty that is
in subtleties never before noticed. It is a beauty that is in pride,
never before earned. It is a beauty that is in composure, never before
achieved. This chapter is about the experience of being as capable as
the weapon you wield. It is about a sense of urgency that is deeply
woven within you, and needs only to be uncovered. At first you cannot
fathom the wonder and perspective that lies beyond stress, but soon it
becomes your own experience, your own perspective, then you too share
the burden of being uniquely capable of seeing it. And so, life carries
a deep sadness. A sadness that it is so carelessly evil to ignore.
Though I hope to have expressed it here, true empathy is an individual
creation that cannot be copied from a recipe. Yet as always, this isn't
the end of the story. It is good to have this struggle. Something lies
beyond the pain. A vivid beauty that encompasses all the subtleties you
could not comprehend in your earlier state. To struggle, perhaps, is
what it means to live. It is the beauty that nourishes all great
efforts.

> *"Though desolation has stricken the City of rippling wavelets,*
>
> *Still does the cherry tree put forth its blossoms of yore."*[^47]


ADDICTION  
==========
# CHAPTER SIX

If you categorize the pursuit of comfort (or more specifically,
supernormal stimuli) as addictive, the nature of the conversation
changes in its entirety. For an addict, it is not unreasonable to take
radical steps toward getting better. For an addict, absolutistic
rehabilitation is appropriate. In order to successfully cure themselves
of their addiction, men and women often go as far as to subject
themselves to a "higher power that can restore sanity" (as stated in the
original version of the 12 step-program[^48]).

If comfort were an addiction, then prioritizing the pursuit of clarity
would simply be a form of pursuing mental health; an effort to get your
head "unfucked", if you will. And getting your head unfucked, simply
isn't a non-radical, consistent process. Bended metal, is not
straightened by retaining it in normal position, it must be leveraged in
the opposite direction, until it eventually corrects the crook,
returning to an unbent form.

In this chapter I'll go into some details regarding the science behind
addiction and the brain changes it causes as they relate to supernormal
stimulus. Though I won't prove or disprove whether comfort is addictive,
I'll demonstrate how it correlates to the solutions offered in this book
and leave you to your own conclusions.

First, let's address what has made this problem so recent and
unprecedented. As I've mentioned in Chapter 2, while supernormal stimuli
has been around for a few decades, its recent pervasiveness has had an
especially detrimental effect on the brain development of adolescents.
We've only been recently experiencing the outcomes of this with the
Millennials, or "Generation Y" as they are called (i.e. born \~1980s --
early 2000s), and it's likely to only get worse with Generation Z.

What we've begun to understand only recently (in contrast to the
previous four hundred years, whereas mainstream medicine and science
believed that the brain's anatomy was, in fact, fixed) is that the human
brain can change itself. This is called "neuroplasticity", and it is an
attribute that is especially prevalent during adolescence.[^49]
Neuroplasticity allows for the forming of new brain pathways and the
weakening of old pathways---a mechanism that allows us to learn new
behaviors, but also has some very distinct downsides.

> *"While the human brain has apparently underestimated itself,
> neuroplasticity isn't all good news . . . a phenomenon I call 'the
> plastic paradox.' Ironically, some of our most stubborn habits and
> disorders are products of our plasticity. Once a particular plastic
> change occurs in the brain and becomes well established, it can
> prevent other changes from occurring."*[^50]

You see, the heightened neuroplasticity in our latest generation of
adolescents has enabled their brains to develop synaptic structures
around an expectation of supernormal stimuli over those of the natural
environment. Dr. Douglas J. Lisle and Dr. Alan Goldhamer, for example,
describe in their book *The Pleasure Trap*[^51] the stage in which the
brain's neuro-adaptability has made it accustomed to junk foods and can
no longer take pleasure in the natural stimulation of healthy foods
(they propose similar methods to combat this condition as in the end of
this chapter).

Essentially, your brain's Reward Circuit (also known as the "Primitive
Brain" or "Limbic System") is based on the simple instincts of pursuing
pleasure, avoiding pain and conserving energy---which provide an
excellent survival "compass" in the natural environment, but are
unreliable in our modern reality. Much like conventional addictions,
these instincts provide us with a "high" when they receive supernormal
stimulation, and eventually get desensitized to the "normal" (or rather,
natural) degrees of stimuli they were once accustomed to.

As you can imagine, before children and teenagers are able to mature and
determine their own life choices based on their own use of reason, they
have already been inundated with a sever dependence on this "high".
This, in my opinion, fits well into the American Society for Addiction
Medicine's new definition of addiction---that includes behavioral
addiction---and identifies it as a chronic brain disorder. It has been
well established further, that activities such as eating[^52],
gambling[^53], internet use[^54] and gaming[^55] can cause addiction.

According to this new definition released in by ASAM in August 2011, the
signs, symptoms and behaviors of addiction reflect a constellation of
underlying brain changes and it is in itself a primary illness or
condition---not necessarily caused by any underlying mental issues. In
other words, addiction (including behavioral addiction) is not simply a
form of self-medication meant to ease personality disorders (as
previously believed) and therefore, many of these addicts do not have
any pre-existing condition NOR have they experienced any childhood
trauma[^56].

So what sort of brain changes occur in addicts and how do they affect
their behavior?

Colloquially, addiction is often seen as behavior that fits the bill for
the 4 C's:

1.  Loss of **control** over use.

2.  Continued use despite knowledge of harmful **consequences**.

3.  **Compulsion** to use.

4.  **Cravings**.

However, at a neuro-cell level, addiction also creates some very
distinct brain changes both structurally and chemically. I'll explain
how this occurs:

The Reward Circuit I've described earlier, is a combination of many
different parts of your brain working together to keep you alive. These
refer to a collection of ancient evolutionary structures in our brain
(Amygdala, Nucleus Accumbens, Orbitofrontal Cortex, Insula, Dorsal
Striatum, Substantia Nigra, Ventral Tegmental Area and Lateral
Hypothalamus) that are involved on an instinctual level with nearly
every mental, emotional and physical function we can think of. In
contrast, your prefrontal cortex is the area of the human brain that is
responsible for decision making, planning complex cognitive behavior,
moderating social behavior, et cetera.

The protein that modifies (through neuroplasticity) the way in which the
pathways between these brain areas interact as they relate to addiction,
is called DeltaFosB (ΔFosB). It is encoded in humans by the FOSB gene,
and research suggests that it is induced into the Nucleus Accumbens
(a.k.a the brain's reward center) via stimulants (e.g. dopamine)[^57].
What this means, is that activities that produce stimulants (such as
dopamine) in your brain, cause this protein to be created---thereby
inducing your brain to make the connection between the cues of your
experience and the sensation of pleasure. The next time your brain
recognizes similar cues (such as smell, taste, touch, sights, sounds,
location, circumstances et cetera), dopamine travels along this
newly-established neuro-pathway and alerts your brain with the cravings
of pleasure.

Furthermore, the creation of this "path of least resistance" neglects
other existing neuro-pathways (causing their weakening through
neuroplasticity) and brings forth a general disinterest in other forms
of pleasure-inducing activities. As this preferred pathway dominates
your nerve cell circuits, the number of synaptic connections, nerve cell
receptors, and dopamine produced by these activities is
diminished---causing you to require a higher dose in order to reach the
same level of satisfaction[^58].

Ultimately, all these neuro processes create the following four brain
changes:

1.  Sensitization: Hyper-reactivity to addiction cues. Similar to
    Pavlovian conditioning, simple cues in the environment that you may
    associate with an addictive behavior act like triggers; causing
    strong cravings and an impulse to engage in this behavior.

2.  Desensitization: Numbed pleasure response. All activities except the
    addiction are no longer compelling, and even the addiction itself
    requires a higher dosage in order to achieve the same effect.

3.  Hypofrontality: Weakened impulse control. Your prefrontal cortex
    (i.e. the area associated with your conscious mind) is inhibited,
    due to weakened connection between itself and the Reward Circuit.
    You may know something is bad for you, but you can't help engaging
    in it.

4.  Altered stress response: Minor stress leads to cravings/relapse.
    Your brain starts using your addiction as a crutch to deal with
    stress; even small amounts of stress create a strong impulse to
    revert to the addiction in order to produce a high.

Sound familiar?

A recent and fascinating case study on the addictive qualities of
supernormal stimulus, can be observed in the recent and rampant
never-before-seen occurrence of pornography-induced erectile dysfunction
(PIED); chronic porn use has proven to alter the Reward Circuit both
structurally and chemically[^59], even among non-addicts[^60]. In the
past 5 years or so, PIED communities have begun to sprout all over the
internet, some with more than 100,000 members[^61]. In his book *Your
Brain On Porn* Gary Wilson collects numerous accounts of such instances
of addiction and recovery, alongside citations from extensive studies,
and even a forum he runs online by the same name for those affected by
the ailment.

Some of the causes reported by the participates on the forums include:
ED, anorgasmia (delayed ejaculation), brain fog/concentration problems,
lethargy/a lack of motivation, social anxiety/lack of confidence,
depression and emotional numbness, declining interest in real partners,
and the creation of fetishes---all of which are either severely
diminished or completely remit after a sustained period of recovery.

He outlines that the recovery from PIED consists of two steps:

1.  Unplug and give your brain a rest from all artificial sexual
    stimulation (also known as a "reboot").

    Though the accumulated DeltaFosB in your brain will usually
    dissipate within 6-8 weeks, studies have shown that in the period
    immediately following the deprivation of the addiction
    neuropathways, extra connections sprout by day 7 and create stronger
    urges to repeat the addictive behavior. These newly formed synapses
    and dendrites are usually gone by week 4[^62], and are the main
    reason cravings can seem stronger soon after quitting.

2.  Start nurturing the "real person" neuro pathways through real
    intimacy with real people. Train your brain for the "right sporting
    event"---reality. Mediation is also recommended in order to further
    improve prefrontal lobe connections.

Gray warns that for most, rebooting is not a linear process, though the
overall trend is positive. Mood swings can occur for quite a while and
everyone's experience is quite different. This area in the science of
addiction is constantly evolving and updating, and only recently have we
begun to truly understand the ramifications of stimuli as supernormal as
high-speed internet porn. In previous years, it seemed as though total
recovery from PIED usually occurred within 1-2 months of rebooting. More
recently, however, it seems people online are reporting of much longer
reboot periods, and it seems that the trend for those who've started on
internet porn at an earlier age is a much longer period of
recovery[^63].If you're one of those individuals, do not get discouraged
by this; the Comfort War is often defined by these sort of
ever-increasing stakes. You are not alone in this great fight, and you
can take pride in it.

Since the earlier 1960s, researchers have been experimenting with the
addiction habits of animals. They would give caged animals the choice of
taking drugs, with fairly unsurprising results; the animals would choose
to take the drugs, get addicted and overdose. By the end of the 1970s,
hundreds of experiments were conducted showing that rats, mice, monkeys,
and other captive mammals will self-inject large doses of heroin,
cocaine, amphetamines, and a number of other drugs[^64].

> *"If a monkey is provided with a lever, which he can press to
> self-inject heroin, he establishes a regular pattern of heroin use\--a
> true addiction\--that takes priority over the normal activities of his
> life . . . Since this behavior is seen in several other animal species
> (primarily rats), I have to infer that if heroin were easily available
> to everyone, and if there were no social pressure of any kind to
> discourage heroin use, a very large number of people would become
> heroin addicts".* [^65]

But in a study[^66] that was conducted by Canadian psychologist Bruce K.
Alexander and his colleagues (published in 1981), these experiments were
conducted instead in a sort of "rat utopia". Rat Park, as it came to be
called, was airy and spacious, with about 200 times the square footage
of a standard laboratory cage. It was also scenic, (with a peaceful
British Columbia forest painted on the plywood walls), comfortable (with
empty tins, wood scraps, and other desiderata strewn about on the
floor), and sociable (with 16-20 rats of both sexes in residence at
once).

Alexander gave the rats a choice between regular tap water and
morphine-laced water, but the rats in Rat Park resisted the morphine
water. They would try it occasionally --- with the females trying it
more often than the males --- but they showed a statistically
significant preference for the plain water. These experiments seem to
suggest that addiction may not be as we once thought it. Perhaps we are
not hijacked by chemical imbalances but rather by unfulfilled needs that
are inherent to the psyche of the human animal.

We may lack the clarity to notice it, but I believe that for many of us,
comfort is there as a cover-up. Our real needs lie below our level of
awareness; our true passion lies dormant past a period of
rehabilitation. The MR creates the basis for this shift and as clarity
is pursued we are confronted with all that we did not realize. I cannot
say for others whether one way of life is objectively better than
another, but I can say it for myself; and I have. In my life, so long as
there is an external force that attempts to dictate for me and in my
stead, I will relish in the exertion of free will in the face of it.

RAGE SPREAD THIN 
================
# CHAPTER SEVEN

> *"If we do not initiate the young, they will burn down the village to
> feel the heat."*[^67]
>
Institutions certainly have a knack for sustaining themselves. Somehow
if you concentrate enough lust for power in one place, it finds a way to
maintain itself. I suspect that this is the reason that although
society's technological advancements have constituted an unstoppable
force throughout the history of mankind, our expertise in the
individual's pursuit of happiness have not expanded significantly.

One could argue, that individual expression cannot be institutionalized.
As I've said before, I believe that the effort of cognitive reappraisal
is an individual creation and cannot be copied from a recipe (and
certainly not across an entire society). Maybe the status-quo of being
born into an environment, is to be drawn into its preservation, and the
influence of the ethereal more-than-you-can-tell-around-you is
responsible.

Perhaps, it is thought suppression that we are inclined to
institutionalize. This would certainly account for how widespread it is,
and as to why the supposed justifications for this are so plenty.
Whether it be the interest of the top few, or the simple inclination of
human personality---this chapter will focus on the influence of the
environment on the individual's Comfort War effort.

First, it is important to note that although I've described many times
the struggle between thought suppression and cognitive reappraisal,
there is a third option; expression. You're not limited to either
keeping your feeling bottled up or molding the way in which you respond
to them, there is also the option of unleashing them in a raw and
spirited outburst.

Yet I think most will agree that constantly expressing your emotions in
modern-day society isn't an effort that will go over particularly well
(or last very long for that matter). Some of that has to do with the
individual's concern with personal validation in the eyes of his/her
peers (which I'll cover in detail in Chapter 8), but the primary reason
you don't do it is because it just simply isn't very practical for
someone wanting to live a normal life. People who get out of their car
and smash windshields over a traffic dispute are rageaholics and will
end up in prison. People who strip their clothes and expose themselves
in public are sexual offenders and may end up in a mental institution.
People who burst into tears whenever the company reports a loss of
profits get kicked out of the boardroom. It is fair to say that limited
expression of emotion is a necessity in normal,
albeit-institutionalized, adult life.

But I am of the opinion (which I will continue to convey in this
chapter) that we confused the idea of "being proper", with the idea of
simply "being". One of our greatest failures, if not THE greatest, in
the effort to recognize, understand and reappraise our emotions, is the
ostracizing of raw expression. How else can we learn to be content with
ourselves, if we do not first confront that with which we are
discontented? The key to all of this, as you know, is creating a life
that is **satisfying** without the crutch of stimuli.

See, in regards to emotional intelligence, I view levels of ability in
the following ranks:

1.  Psychopathy)

<!-- -->

1.  Suppression

2.  Expression

3.  Reappraisal

Whether it is the rage of anger and frustration, the uproar of pride and
achievement, the outcry of anguish and despair, hullabaloo or
brouhaha---it doesn't matter. Somehow we confused expressing our
emotions with them getting the better of us. And while it's true that
excessive emotion can often signify that we've transitioned from a
setting in which we were competent to a setting where we are
incompetent---that's all good and well only if you're not already in a
reality in which you are incompetent and must face that fact.

Think of the implications of this. If expression---the stepping-stone
from thought suppression to composed reappraisal---is eliminated, is it
any wonder we cannot make the leap? Or perhaps we had at times, but
during a moment of weakness, instead of momentarily reverting to
expression, took a step back and plunged into the depths of pathology.
Of course, simple expression isn't a noble goal worth striving for in
and of itself---I am simply making the case that it should not be
unaccepted. There are, of course, good ways AND bad ways to express how
you feel. Just as for some it may be a step in the wrong direction, it
may be a positive change for others.

It's easy to see how out of a fear of letting our emotions get the best
of us, or perhaps out of a simple need for it, we've opted not to
display them. I suggest that now is the time to recognize that our
emotions will have an impact one way or another, and therefore until a
time when they can be harnessed they should at the very least be
addressed.

If thought suppression really had been institutionalized, it would have
to be apparent in history and demonstrated to benefit those institutions
as a whole. The first and obvious way in which this was done, was
through the use of repressive rule.

When society enforces the use of repression, its institutions disallow
for the expression of natural urges---thereby guaranteeing the
manufacture of a person's feelings of shame, guilt and a distorted
identity. He or she relies on the pillars of society they perceive and
used them as a crutch. It is unreasonable to hope that in those
environments, people will overcome the urge to suppress their emotions.
Even should they attempt to overcome themselves, the momentum of social
validation is certain to undo their efforts. That is the pin of the
repression grenade---even should you attempt to discover yourself, those
around you will resent your effort.

Since our natural urges are an integral part of our psyche, they are
bound to surface at one point or another, and if these occurrences are
seen as "sin" they can easily distort individual perception. The Greek
word Hamartia is meant to encompass all forms of sin, and literally
means "to miss the mark"; but I would think that you have to ask
yourself when accused of sinning: "whose mark was it that I missed?"

Take, for example, the use of sexual repression by institutional
authorities. In 1850, the New Orleans Medical & Surgical Journal
declared masturbation public enemy number one[^68]. As of May 2015[^69],
92% of married women in Egypt have undergone female genital mutilation.
During the Cultural Revolution in China, women were forced to wear a
unisex uniform with short hair and the enjoyment of sex was disallowed
(even the time and location of marital copulation was centrally-planned
and assigned by the government)[^70].

There is also the repression of curiosity, intellectualism & mind
alteration. During the 1970s in Cambodia people were tortured and killed
for being academics or even for merely wearing eyeglasses[^71]. During
the White Terror campaign of the Spanish Civil War, an estimated 200,000
civilians were killed, targeting heavily writers, artists, teachers and
professors[^72]. The meditative practice of Falun Gong is prohibited in
China, and the Church of Scientology considers psychiatry to be an
industry of death. Furthermore, the use and even research of psychedelic
drugs is still banned by most governments of the (so-called) Free World.

> *"There are certain bad habits we\'ve groomed our whole life--from
> personality flaws to fashion faux pas. And it has been the role of
> parents and friends, outside of some minor tweaking, to reinforce the
> belief that we\'re okay just as we are. But it\'s not enough to just
> be yourself. You have to be your best self. And that\'s a tall order
> if you haven\'t found your best self yet."*[^73]

As personal expression is pursued, the self becomes more differentiated.
Overcoming challenges and achievement inevitably leaves a person more
capable, more skilled. After each episode of Csikszentmihalyi's "flow",
a person becomes a more unique individual, less predictable, possessed
of rarer skills.

Institutions that seek to maintain their status-quo have repeatedly
repressed individuality under the pretense that uniformity is somehow
virtuous---associating it with opposing ideas such as team work,
culture, or belonging; as if individual expression wasn't entirely
harmonious with these ideas. In this effort, it was also necessary
therefore to repress the pursuits of optimal experience, control in
life, or any attempt to understand, accept and leverage our instinctual
urges. By means of using guilt, shame and public scrutiny to oppose that
which is an inherit part of us---we become accustomed to repress that
which isn't conventional, and conform to what is.

Unsurprisingly perhaps, the Swiss psychiatrist Carl G. Jung would often
use individuation as an indicator of mental health. And he is not alone
in this; Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, popularized the
idea of the unconscious and how potent sexual and aggressive motives are
in shaping the way in which we think. He theorized that the psyche was
structured into three part: the id, the superego and the ego. Simply
put, the id is your impulsive instinct that seeks pleasure, and avoids
pain, your superego is your logical thinking that counter-balances the
imprudence of the id, and your ego is the "self" which mediates your
reality. This pursuit of the ego, the discovery of the self, requires
both the acknowledgement of the conscious and well as the subconscious,
and therein lies the importance of addressing your urges.

Anger, sexual need, craving intimacy, curiosity and ultimately,
fear---cannot be easily uncovered once suppressed. From the resulting
distorted perspective, these needs are hard to understand, or even
realize, they cannot be assessed and are often overlooked through sheer
arrogance. When shame and guilt are status-quo, and urges are repressed
into the corner of blissful ignorance, thought suppression is
institutionalized. It is noticed only in the constant sense of unease
permeated by rage spread thin. It disallows for a relaxed, "bored" sense
of just "being". The aversion to unstimulated observance is perhaps the
most significant factor that prevents people from self-discovery. Though
the individual is certain to benefit from the pursuit of self-discovery,
those whose interests are in stagnation will not, as such an effort is
destined to change the world around them.

But today, things are different. Our society is very open to the ideas
of sex and drugs (even rock n' roll). This is especially apparent in
advertising, which often leverages our innate urges into their sales
pitch. Coca Cola doesn't tell you about their health benefits, it
advertises love, happiness, fun and sex. Nike doesn't tell you about the
materials used in their products, but advertises hopes, dedication and
achievement. Our deepest desires and repulsions are plastered all-over
in everyday life; family, safety, social status, fear, guilt and the
list goes on.

Interestingly enough, much is this shift is due to the nephew of the
aforementioned Sigmund Freud---Edward Bernays. In his book
*Propaganda*[^74], Bernays (often thought of as the father of public
relations) boasts of having directly caused the popularization of
smoking among women, the bacon and eggs American breakfast, adding
fluoride to the water, framing WWI as "bringing democracy to Europe",
overthrowing the democratically elected president of Guatemala Colonel
Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in the service of the United Fruit Company, and
more.

One of the ways he did this, Bernays explained, is by creating a
paradigm-shift in advertising whereas rather than providing people with
information to drive their behavior, commercials would target and play
on their irrational emotions. This was accomplished by creating
associations between products and our deepest instincts. And so, in the
age of democracy, instead of being repressed our desires became
manufactured.

> *"He \[Edward Bernays\] showed American corporations for the first
> time, how they could make people want things they didn't need, by
> linking mass-produced goods to their unconscious desires. Out of this
> would come a new political idea of how to control the masses . . . It
> was the start of the all-consuming self.\"*[^75]
>
Instead of a world where our deepest urges are repressed and kept
secret, they are manipulated and spread thin. Our animal-like
instinctual needs are not healthily addressed but rather viciously
abused with a bombardment of unnatural and by-proxy experiences. We eat
junk food to express our enjoyment and fun-loving, we wear brands to
express our personality and individuality, we purchase entertainment
consoles to express our adventure-seeking and risk-taking, we watch
internet porn to express our sexual desires, we follow celebrities to
express our social-know-how and belonging et cetera. All these
experiences by-proxy have drained our desires into a nullified stupor.
Real experiences have been replaced with artificial experiences and thus
forced-fed stimuli has become the latest propagator of emotional thought
suppression.

The modern-day ruling institutions are no longer governments, but
financial interests. Not only in systems where the political class are
bought and paid for[^76]---though that is the natural consequence of any
popularized environment in which the crowd fails at scrutinizing their
public officials---but even if there were to exist a free system, still
democratized. So long as there existed no significant disincentive in
manipulating the preferences of the mob, it would not remain free for
long.

These forms of manipulating natural urges, be it through repression or
manipulation, inhibit the mental health of the individual. By either
shaming them into feelings of guilt or leveraging them into
mass-behavior to serve a governing agenda, an individual develops
repressed emotions that build up beneath their awareness and are never
directly addressed. The way in which these manifest in our psyche is
often through deep feelings of pride and resentment.

> *"Pride, sustained by tainted emotions, is the root cause of 80
> percent of all illnesses, mental, emotional, and physical, not to
> mention problems with marriage, children, and business. Resentment
> forms and nurtures the alien being. Puffed up with pride's emotional
> essence, your soul is tainted and cut off from the eternal living
> force within you. Pride, sitting there unholy on the throne of the
> holy, becomes addicted to the feeling that have always provided you
> with a sense of worth. It lives in you through being sustained by the
> very same emotions the parent spirit used to penetrate you
> traumatically in the very beginning. The emotional addiction you
> equate with being alive is the illusory life that leads to death in
> the service of an insidious purpose other than that for which you have
> been created."*[^77]

Many whom experience great distraught or desperation are often
confronted with strong feelings of unfairness. Life seems as though it
is stacked against us, even though "we are deserving and others are
not". This is the manifestation of pride and resentment, it is to make
the assumption (be it true or false) that life is stacked against us and
therefore not worthwhile. In reality, this is a self-fulfilling
prophecy, and it is many times the case that our own personal and
unaddressed emotions serve as our prime inhibitor.

These are the obstructers of personal growth; gross pride and
resentment. Resentment, as it invites the perception of unfairness to
tie you down, narrow your vision and wallow you in misery. Pride,
because out of fear of proving a "sucker", you will choose to keep the
world broken, rather than dare to fix it. Could we realize we've erred
without the faculty of humility? Could we rise up to a personal
challenge, if the "privilege" of others blinds us? Though justified
anger can be useful, its irrational counterpart is killer. Pride and
resentment spawn an individual that is so irresponsible and so
obsessively fearful of being deemed a sucker, he or she voluntarily
paves for themselves the most direct path to deserving such a title.

> *"When an inner situation is not made conscious, it appears outside,
> as fate.\"*[^78]
>
Interestingly, the Russian word фраер (fraer) meaning "sucker" has been
replicated into the cultures and languages of Polish, as well as Hebrew
and Romanian. In contrast, that very same word in German, Czech and
Macedonian is actually used colloquially as meaning "cool guy", or
"suitor", but admittedly, that's neither here nor there.

The antithesis of these feelings that wallow us in willful
self-righteous blindness as we deteriorate can be found in humility,
gratitude and an urgent sense of responsibility. Do not find yourself
deserving, but seek to improve what is. Do not fester in your discontent
and spite, but mold it, use it to your advantage, address your anger and
express it whenever useful. See yourself for what you are and do
something about it.

As I've mentioned many times in this book, life is not about having
control over everything, but rather the exertion of control where we
can. It is not about seeing yourself as more than you are, but rather
taking action despite your deficiencies. True liberty, is to pursue life
despite its difficulties.

"So," you might ask, "how can I possibly negate these influences and
pursue individualism? Is it time to pack my bags and move to the woods?"
Certainly not. While it important to recognize this inner-Dionysian
element of our personality, this does not negate the incredible benefit
society still has to offer. Despite terrible conditions and tremendous
fragility, modern-day society provides (for most) an environment where
all their biological needs can be consistently met, and we should be
grateful for it.

Society provides you with the convenience of shelter, a consistent food
source, medicine, education, disposal and the list goes on. And though
it is true that to forego all these conveniences could potentially
strengthen your character, I would recommend that you only consider it
if such an undertaking is within your stress tolerance.

Rather, it is instead important to accept that while we've built a
society that is incredibly effective at allowing us to survive and
reproduce---it contains elements that are counter-productive to our
thriving. For an individual to pursue his sense of "self" and growth,
these influences must be addressed and molded to his benefit. You'll
have to learn to recognize these influences and negate them to the best
of your ability. You will have to restructure for yourself a new (or
perhaps modified) environment instead; one that is congruent to your
efforts. It is important to understand that now that we've created a
system that is so effective at sustaining survival, it is betraying you.

This brings me to the conclusion on this chapter on the influence of the
environment. Though the method I've developed to negate it is quite
simple in nature, it is also tall order. As always, in the effort of the
Comfort War, the pursuit of clarity is prioritized---the pursuit of the
self; and anything which inhibits this effort is attended to. Through
the daily practice of the MR, through the implementation of
unconditional rules, the Comfort Warrior already sets himself apart from
the crowd. Nevertheless, there are still a few more respects that can be
addressed.

First, it is important to provide an outlet in your life for your
animalistic nature. If you can manage it, take opportunities to explore
the wilderness, opportunities to unleash your aggression and
opportunities to unleash your sexuality. Go fishing, hit the gym, score
a date, you get the idea. Address your inhibitions with real
experiences; lash out on a punching bag instead of swallowing a grudge.
Share an intimate moment with another individual instead of watching
porn. Formulate a composed lifestyle that is integrated with consistent
periods that tend to your primal compulsions.

And by the way, this includes injustices. If you see something that is
wrong, if you experience something that shouldn't be, don't tolerate it.
Address it, confront it---that is how you negate its influence. The
moment you force your attention away from such things is the moment they
take hold in your subconscious.

Secondly, seek the unknown. Both for the curiosity of your intellect and
for the adventurousness of your desire. I think of this principle as the
"explorer's gamble": dare to risk and explore the unknown, there is
something better out there. It is that simple: there is something better
out there. You want to negate the influence of your environment? Seek
other environments, other ideas, gain new perspectives, it's how you
found this book, isn't it?

Finally, belong to your own reality within your existing environment.
Warriors belong to a clan, and as a participant in this effort, you are
no exception. Though your current culture and society may fail to
represent it, they are merely byproducts of a stone-age mind, and you
have the right to shape them into congruence. Though it may still be
impossible for us to join our lifestyles entirely, remember that you
exist alongside a principle that is fought for worldwide. You may be
seeking individuality, but you are not alone, Warrior.

RAW LIVING 
==========
# CHAPTER EIGHT

The human condition is ineffective, so long as it cannot calm itself
without stimuli. No matter the nature of your fixation, if you cannot
remain content without its presence you will never exit the unstable
state of its craving. The final frontier in this effort is one that we
all share, as it is perhaps the most difficult (and useful) to
overcome---seeking the approval of others. Nothing, I repeat,
**nothing** will get you stuck in the social momentum of a life that is
not your own **more** than the need for validation.

This is of course, why the MR must be conducted in private; but there is
more to it. Forgoing the sought of approval and forging in its stead a
life that is satisfying without stimuli is the essence of the Comfort
Warrior's earnest pursuit of himself and of clarity. Life contains a
tremendous abundancy of hardship, and though it may seem at first that
we are not exposed to it---the truth, as you pursue it, reveals itself
as hardship that was only repressed, and consequential far beyond your
awareness. This difficulty will perhaps never be entirely within our
capability to bear, but it can be approached. This is the human effort.
A toil of fragile generations, upon fragile generations, in a world not
suited for our comfort, overcoming their limits and overcoming
themselves to propagate the marvelous glory of life onward.

I believe that I will never think to myself: "there, I've dealt with it
all. I no longer feel pain, a sense of urgency, fear, or that we've
corrected all that's required it." But I do feel contended every single
day. I do feel that life is worthwhile despite this labor, and even in
the terrible uncertainty of the future, I can stand calm. That is
because I can take pride in my effort, I can take pride in knowing my
limits and keeping my stress within their bound, I can take pride in
doing exactly that which has made me more effective than at any other
point in my life. Though it is strikingly different than my
surroundings, I've established my life on principles that I am true to;
that has been the key to it all---letting go of my need to validate
myself in the eyes of others.

> *"Contentment is not a lack of ambition or action or intensity. It\'s
> the condition of our hearts while we\'re pursuing those things."*[^79]
>
Naturally, that's not to say that validation can't be helpful in some
ways. It can assist us in staying centered, and our monkey-brains crave
it regardless, so there's no use in simply denying yourself of such a
need. It is only dependence that is harmful. And so I suggest you
approach it in the same way you would approach food; go for the salad,
not the cheeseburger.

The point to avoid in validation, is when it prompts you to act and
think in ways that you don't perceive as having merit by your own
evaluation. Validation can drain you, it can get you hooked on its high
and thereby affect your behavior to an extent that you would never allow
if you were in full control. Certainly, there is potential in life for
things to get completely out of hand, and in those instances our need
for validation is necessary to reel us back in. If you're acting crazy,
a good friend will let you know. Also, it is often necessary to get a
task accomplished through teamwork and cooperation, and in those
occasions caring about the perception of the other parties is an
integral part of the equation. Yet validation is nevertheless the key
player in preventing self-actualization. It is your key foe in the
pursuit of a personal sense of clarity and demands an astounding sense
of certainty in one's ideas long before it can be challenged.

Though we often perceive our need for the approval of others as a great
aid at our side that prevents us from engaging in defective behavior, we
fail to realize that indulging in this urge to excess will certainly
betray any such sort of effort. It's true that we get good at
socializing by caring about what people think, but that very same
socialization can all too quickly become the end and not the means. More
than the pursuit of validation soars you to new heights, it will level
you onto familiar ones. More than it will challenge you to take risk, it
will persuade you to settle for the mundane. Validation is balanced at
the average, and though it can often seem a ladder to those at the
bottom, it is an anchor to those who desire the top.

Even when you find yourself in situations where you deem it would be
beneficial to gain the approval of others--do so on your terms.
Highlight that which **you** deem valuable, based on your inner truth.
Present yourself under a conviction to be judged based on your efforts,
not your current position. Even when you find there is a need to
evaluate others--burden yourself with the effort of investigating their
will, rather than their station. Let me be clear, I'm not talking about
crediting the undeserving, I'm not talking about giving out the benefit
of doubt based on "intentions". I'm talking about learning to judge the
subtitles of a person's conviction, their **real** sense of authenticity
and integrity, their ability to separate between what is and that which
they want; test them if you have to. It is an incredibly hard thing, and
it is no wonder most have opted out, but the Comfort Warrior thrives on
such hardship.

More than anything, validation is the driving force behind social
momentum. Before you know it, it has you in church, in school, in
university, in an office job, in marriage, in parenthood, in debt and in
the grave. Surely some of those aren't all bad, but the point stands
that you've reached for them often to please others, often to have a
place, often to fit in, often to stay safe.

> *"When you're alone with your thoughts, you get an idea of what your
> thoughts actually are. If you live your life just acting constantly on
> the momentum of people's expectations---of you wanting to be liked by
> these other people---you can run into a trap and you set up a life
> that you didn't really want . . . People just make the mistake of
> getting stuck . . . But the person who's able to look at themselves
> more closely is the one that is going to get the more rational
> results."*[^80]

Validation has kept us alive, it kept us in communities that survived
harsh conditions. We bequeathed it to future generations and built grand
societies as a result. Yet we've reached a point where it no longer
contributes to our thriving in the meaningful way it once did.

There is something about validation, and this is important, that sets
the tone completely for whether or not you can maintain your focus. Your
thinking suffers a distinct shift when you exit an environment of
privacy, have you noticed this? It's key. Perhaps this is the most
valuable lesson (but it must come last, as it cannot stand its own). It
is as though you were in the ocean of your mind, able to dive deep and
see its wonders---but suddenly---you hit the sea floor, stand up, and
you're in ankle deep water, unable to re-submerge. Your mind somehow
elects to sacrifice thought, allowing only for stripped-down, bare-bones
spurts of comprehension as it allocates life-or-death importance to
processing the social information around you.

Seeking validation is not a need that can be simply recognized on the
surface of your subconscious, its roots are deeply entrenched and can
only get exposed incrementally. Not only might you not notice the
influence of it, but it's not unreasonable to assume that the entire
measure of your psyche has been structured under its relentless
guidance. How likely are you really to fully notice the impact of
others' judgment on your thoughts themselves? Approval is **always**
taken into consideration and that is **exactly** why the effort to find
yourself is so brilliantly dissimilar to your expectations. It is
**exactly** why you must base your greatest decisions in an state in
which this influence has been reined in.

Studies have shown that by the sheer volume of human brain activity, the
most powerful emotional experience is humiliation[^81]. It has also been
further demonstrated that loneliness is linked to lessened brain
activity in the ventral striatum (associated with learning) when exposed
to pleasant activities and lessened brain activity in the
temporoparietal junction (associated with empathy) when exposed to
unpleasant activities.[^82] Oxytocin, the hormone that connects us
emotionally and empathetically, works in a positive-feedback loop[^83]
where the more is present---the more is released and can perhaps explain
why it is so easy for us to get caught up in our validation needs. Quite
astoundingly, it has been found not only to be released during moments
of trust and intimacy, but even as a countermeasure[^84] to stress.[^85]

So you can imagine, that if stress will often drive us to seek social
connection, and if chronic loneliness can plague our thinking, that not
only can some measures of validation be essential to our psyche, but
that the unsatisfying of such needs can worsen stress and entice us
toward alternative forms of stimuli. This is a key point when
considering the grip-hold of social approval. It is not unreasonable to
assess that if your thinking---in regards to social intimacy---is
skewed, that you are far removed from your ability to recognize it as
the player at fault.

Forget about needing others to like you, or wanting to remove yourself
entirely from society. The balance to be found in validation is a state
of cognition that is pursued through self-actualization. Searching for
who you are, through the means available to you in your MR, results not
only in self-discovery, but in a loss of self-consciousness. For most, I
believe that optimal experience is inherently intertwined with a sense
of belonging to something. This does not mean the sought of group
validation, but rather a purposeful commitment to a shared effort. It is
the actual forgoing of a need for approval that solidifies and
manipulates your efforts into a form produced by your full potential.

The conclusion is apparent.

**Urges can be useful, but never allow for dependence**. Validation,
much like anger, fear, libido, stress, frustration, love, joy, boredom,
empathy, or thrill, etc. are experiences for which **you determine the
significance** and not vice versa. Do not dare to underestimate their
influence, we are overwhelmingly fragile and susceptible to their
presences. Validation is the most primal, most inherent and most
affecting facet of our mind. To live independent of it is to
relentlessly confront stress, relentlessly induce effort, relentlessly
impose your willpower upon it, all the while subduing it with composure.

> *"Be at war with your vices"*[^86]

When the brain registers intense excitement, it numbs itself temporarily
so that we can pursue more of it.[^87] Stimuli will encourage you to
gorge and that means that simply listening to your body's demands is not
a viable strategy; in the modern environment, it doesn't make sense.
Your effort, as a rational individual, is to build for yourself a life
that does make sense. Moreover, in a world that doesn't always offer you
any good choice, you will have to work to claim victories even in these
imbalanced conditions. In this manner, the Comfort War is as much about
discovering yourself and your perfect world, as it is about learning to
live in a world that is not perfect. You've likely forced yourself to
rationalizations and sunk cost fallacies once you've first realized
these hardships, and to tear those apart is to be satisfied in constant
conflict with your surroundings.

In your own life, I encourage you to analyze the spectrum of your urges.
Place them as they scale between need and necessity to luxury and
excess. You'll find, that as soon as you cross a threshold, not only do
the rewards diminish, but the craved activity can lose all forms of
benefit. If you overeat, oversleep, overtrain et cetera---it may lead
you only to feel hungrier, more tired or more weakened et cetera.

According to scholar Douglas Wile[^88], the ancient Chinese Daoists
recorded that orgasm can inflame sexual desire (after that immediate
post-coital relief)---even as it depletes the body and brain. At the
same time, they insisted that pleasurable intercourse is vital to good
physical and psychological health. Their solution to this conundrum
followed the discovery that frequent sex with occasional ejaculation was
less depleting than occasional sex with habitual ejaculation. In their
view, lots of sex with little orgasm actually nourished lovers
sustainably with whole-body *ching* (vitality), and relieved men of
\"lustful thoughts". In contrast, the attempt to meet one\'s sexual
needs through \"expenditure without restraint\" depleted the brain,
accounting for symptoms like premature ejaculation, uneasiness after
orgasm, nocturnal emission and relationship disharmony.

Human consciousness has been the defining achievement of our progress as
a species thus far, and the challenge that lies ahead of us is to
flourish it into a state of independence. It is the moral and
intellectual equivalent of strengthening your body before you begin
practicing with a weapon. It is the pursuit of an individual caliber as
great as has ever been achieved, and implementing it as the norm. It is
about the combined effort to pursue the truth and our betterment through
the use of our greatest potential.

The liberty in developing your clarity, the liberty in developing your
responsibility and authenticity, the liberty in the Comfort War effort,
and the liberty in raw living is one where you recognize this lesson.
Again, while urges can be useful, and even acting on them can often be
beneficial--- you mustn't let them create a dependence.

You build the tolerance to have these immense drives rampage within you,
yet you keep them contained. You build the strength to assess them for
what they are, and only draw of them the elements that serve your
purpose. You forgo all sense of "it must be that way, because it feels
that way", and substitute it with your own conclusions---deduced from
the rational and responsible application of reasonable judgement. This
includes anger, this includes fear, this includes sexual needs, this
includes all physiological needs, this includes social validation, this
includes stimuli gratification, it includes empathy and sympathy, it
includes pride and confidence, it includes every aspect of your human
existence and every aspect of the experiences therein.

That is raw living; this constant state of war. Maintaining exposure to
these stressors, addressing them when reasonable yet never indulging. It
is self-discipline; built truly upon your own volition and nothing
that's externally imposed. It is to tread carefully, near the limit of
your tolerance and thus experience optimally. It is a calculated effort,
solidified in an understanding of your nature, methods that are
effective and an ethos to live by.

Once you acknowledge it, that you're amidst a war, you live.

And what is the result of such an effort? Once you are able to live this
way, without dependence on a high?

The notion of living a life that is gratifying without stimuli, is
equivocal to the notion of being capable of dealing with the underlying
stress in your system. This stress may go regularly unnoticed in your
current daily life, but as soon as it is left ungratified by stimuli, it
will resurface. Living as such, is a malformed state of chronic stress
that is undealt with. All things considered, it can be very reasonable
to feel stressed in this way in the first place, but never to ignore it.

Sooner or later, as you learn to muster your composure and harness this
stress to your own benefit, you find meaning---a reason that makes this
difficulty worthwhile, exhausts the stress and fills your life with joy.
So long as it is acknowledged, the distress no longer inhibits your
ability to relax, think clearly and take in all the subtle experiences
and sensations. It demands only a willingness toward hardship, a
readiness to take it in and the capability to endure it.

That is what brings this book together in this final chapter. The
willingness for hardship, the harnessing to purpose through reappraisal,
the moral obligation and the joy of effort and attention. To achieve it,
though your day-to-day progress may seem like a scatter plot, you can
establish a baseline with the MR that sets your direction toward
constant and consistent improvement. Slowly but surely, overall, you are
better than you were last month, and the trend continues. This is the
key point, a method to a life that is satisfying without stimuli, for an
addict so entrenched in it he's/she's been its best friend.

To find satisfaction in your life without stimuli, is to find
contentment in effort and difficulty. As I've claimed, I believe that
the very indulgences we engage in drain us and nullify our potential for
raw experience. To destroy your reliance in such a way, is to undergo a
transformation. From a disinterested, dragged-along tree-sloth, and
functionally dependent on uppers and downers, you discover a calm life
of exertion, and then a savage world of thrill. You shatter your
presuppositions, your reliance on comfortable and conforming ideas, and
you discover a life that is first simple and thoughtful, and later
awe-inspiring.

Through the pursuit of clarity, you fulfil mind and body through effort.
Without comfort to void your intensity, your ability and purpose
flourish. It is a true process of self-discovery, without
rationalizations, justifications, biases or timidness.

As time progresses, stress becomes your friend. Despite fatigue and
resistance, you are able to endure it with composure. This is what a
congruent conscious & self-consciousness operation looks like. You will
determine whether you chose to live despite suffering. Whether the world
is beautiful enough, life precious enough. Make no mistake, until now
you have experienced despair, not suffering. It is only despair that
lacks meaning that is truly unbearable.

For you to be able to accept suffering as a condition of existence is
inseparable from dedicating yourself to a genuine, worthwhile pursuit.
How would you live if you could in any way and in consideration of such
a cost? Consider, that there is a whole new world you have yet been
exposed to--and the first taste of it will reveal it.

Remember Rat Park? It won't be long before your avoidance of
prefabricated thrills will become an aversion to them. A congruent mind
consolidates itself in eagerness toward constructive habits and disgust
toward destructive ones.

Raw living is about liberty; liberty in the injection of control into a
world without it. Despite the seemingly inevitable forces of life,
freedom is found within that which we can control. The liberty of the
Comfort Warrior is in his self-validation, his self-discovery and his
personal pursuit. It is an achievement that cannot come without the
experiences earned and further pursued by him or her in their lifetime.
This is the lesson that is rendered useless when it is stand-alone, but
is the most impactful when it is part of a complete picture. It is the
core of a living experience, and the product of a successful balance
between the Comfort War nature, method and ethos. It is also my personal
experience, one that seemed inconceivable when I had first started on
this journey.

At first, I had gotten a small taste of it, and that was enough. To my
surprise, as my skill and dedication increased, the experience had
improved and expanded beyond my original expectation. By the time my
hopes and wishes had been achieved, they've uncovered desires that were
drastically different; desires that for the first time in my life,
actually represented what I'd really wanted.

It terrifies me that we created a world so numb to the sensations that
I'm describing, that they cannot be recognized externally; this makes
them unknown, and fearsome as a result. This is why conquering fear is
synonymous with a fulfilling life---though we do not know what is out
there, we can hope that we will come across something that is better
than that which we've found thus far.

And though we are inclined to be convinced this isn't the case, it is
the burning, smoldering truth.

You can live with thrill, intensity and strive balanced by calm, peace
and clarity. I will not ask that you take my word for it on faith, but
on the premise of my ideas. Exclude the emotional bias, and evaluate
this book with your most able use of reason. It has not been falsely
presumed based on not knowing the deepest trenches of comfort's
grasp---this I can assure you. This has been written, already knowing
your pain. Throw everything you've got at it and reach solace.

Liberty in pushing the boundaries of tolerance of needs; liberty in the
acceptance of hardship and using conscious, difficult decisions to
mitigate it; liberty from the influences of your environment, your
nurture and perhaps even your nature---of whatever destiny was seemingly
dictated for you in your genetic code. Such action demands courage, the
saying goes "freedom isn't free", or as the Americans say it: this will
only be the land of the free, so long as it is the home of the brave.

For some time now, I've had the distinct pleasure of leaving indulgences
unfulfilled. The Comfort War has come with slow and incremental growth
that I never would have achieved otherwise, and so for those of you at
the very start---I'd like to share a glimpse of what comes next. In my
personal experience, I've found that through enough tolerance, enough
persistence, and enough failure, rare moments arise. In these, one's
biggest stride is achieved.

Imagine a focused life, a constant exertion of effort, a consistent
savagery. Imagine finding fulfillment in a sustained advance that
remains within your tolerance---and where it culminates.
'***Mushaburui***' is a Japanese word that roughly translates as "the
warrior's tremble"; a ferocious shattering of normalcy, when faced with
an unavoidable challenge that is just beyond the precipice of his/her
ability. It is meant to describe an incredibly rare moment of
overwhelming fear, excitement, and composure. When faced with a
challenge greater than yourself, but something you're chased
nonetheless, the psyche reverberates. In a sense, our pursuit of
betterment is a pursuit readying us for these inescapable happenings. As
it is not possible to accomplish such a feat in your current state,
you're faced only with the choice of stepping forward in courage---and
become more, right then and there.

Though my life would have been worthwhile without such moments, I am
grateful to have experienced a few. Though life is never quite clear
cut, it does have a variance, and I dare to attest to the fact that
these moments could not have possibly peaked in any greater beauty.
Really, I can't describe it, but I can still feel, looking back, that
those were the moments in which I couldn't have felt more authentic and
fulfilled. That may not sound like much, but it was; for the sad and
wretched little boy that I once was, I had suddenly reached the summit
of my foremost experience.

Optimal experience is not comfortable. It requires difficulty, matched
by effort and attention. And that's enjoyable. Perhaps not in a
prefabricated, short-term, snip-snap, artificially stimulating sort of
way, but rather in experience of true relishment, satisfaction, thrill,
outcry, serenity. People feel most alive, and fulfilled when they
express who they truly are and that is a pursuit that not only requires
effort, but is unpredictable. Much like artists that start out with the
least preconceived notion of how their work would turn out, end up being
most creative[^89]---regardless of how you're feeling now, regardless of
your expectation, this effort is likely to bear a form of living that is
entirely different and wholly spectacular.

You'll notice, that there is now a difference between a task that
requires effort and a task that is difficult. So long as you are capable
of something, you can simply do it and your mind doesn't get in the way.
Your focus is now maintained for long periods, and you're able to
completely tune out your surroundings through sheer willpower. Your
dreams become more fluid, lucid and contain clear ideas. You begin to
recognize your shortcoming, recognize your ambitions and weave them
together into a beautiful fabric.

Raw living does not require a hermetic or puristic lifestyle. Rather, in
pursuit of your own inner-truth it drills that you don't "give in", that
you don't simplify---that you don't seek comfort in its own right. This
can absolutely occur within an environment that you don't accept---an
environment that does not suit you, that imposes that which you
abhor---within it, this is still possible. However, this does require
that you learn to simply "sift through the bullshit". In other words,
you need to learn to extract the good, and let the shit sink in every
aspect of life.

If your surroundings are tainted, withdraw their essence, see them for
what they are and keep only what you like. Disagree with someone? Great,
now find what they are right about. Agree with them? Even better, now
find what offenses you've glossed over to permit it. When the individual
grows, he grows complex, and a complex identity requires confronting
complex suppositions. Learn to break ideas down into their smallest
elements of truth, and rebuild your own.

In this way, you'll attain perhaps the most useful attribute of
all---perspective; remembering of the experiences that lied behind doors
you've once kept locked. For many, that former denial will stay
prevalent, and can you imagine the life of a Comfort Warrior, surrounded
by a reality other aren't willing to see?

Raw living is about existing in your environment effectively (which ties
into the previous chapter), despite its conditions. That means to be
grey while suffocated by either black or white, relentlessly sifting and
readjusting between spectrums. You should never feel the need to
wholeheartedly agree or disagree. Perfect what's right through
complexity. Including this book. And by the way, so long as you employ
this critical analysis, know that it is a thousand fold more rewarding
when, eventually, you do find some you're completely in-line with.
They've earned it, despite your scrutiny.

Nevertheless, the idea of the Comfort Warrior is invariably the idea of
someone who is separate from the environment. Although he/she
participates, it is unlikely that they would enjoy the luxury of
congruent surroundings. And though such a time may come where they can
wholly participate---they hope---for now they must impose their focus
and establish their own sense of clarity within the abyss of pervasive
nonsense. This is the reality, we are a clan of individuals in exile.

This will be hard, much like the rest of this effort. It may be lonely
and you may not be used to it. Remember, do not suppress the loneliness
but instead reappraise it. Let its hurt flow through you, understand
that it is coming from your survival instincts, and attribute it to the
injustice that exists in the world. Although the Comfort Warrior is
content with his/her effort, this does not mean he/she is content with
their circumstances. Rather, they evaluate and act to change them. One
day, we will, but first we must strengthen ourselves. It will not be
easy to bear.

END NOTES 
=========

Thank you for reading "Comfort War". I think a book such as this must be
as difficult for the reader as it is for the writer. This willingness
for shared hardship, I believe, is capable of unleashing the full extent
of human potential and perhaps someday even turn the world on its head.

My personal thanks to the creators of the works references here, whose
efforts have heavily influenced mine. Though I certainly do not agree or
endorse all that they have ever said or written, I am deeply humbled by
the pursuit of inner truth that had led them to the publishing of such
works. And of course, (Csikszentmihalyi said it best,) they are still
not responsible for what might be unsound in this book---that is
exclusively my own doing.

With your permission, I'd like to warmly encourage you to continue in
your pursuit of personal discovery and face your own moments of
mushaburui. Or better yet, in the words of Goodkind:

Your life is yours alone.

Rise up and live it.

To join the community, tune in to podcasts or support this publication,
please visit <http://ComfortWar.com>.

If you have any questions, or have found any of the information here to
be erroneous, dubious, or ill-presented, please don't hesitate to
contact me at <Esh@ComfortWar.com>.

 {#section-2 .Chapter}

[^1]: Nietzsche, F., & Large, D. (1998). *Twilight of the Idols, or, How
    to Philosophize with a Hammer*. New York: Oxford University Press.

[^2]: Morse, G. (2002, June 1). Hidden Minds. Retrieved October 4, 2015,
    from https://hbr.org/2002/06/hidden-minds

[^3]: Wegner, Daniel M.; Erber, Ralph; Zanakos, Sophia (1993). *Ironic
    Processes in the Mental Control of Mood and Mood-related Thought*.
    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 65(6), Dec 1993,
    1093-1104.

[^4]: Purdon, C. (2004). *Empirical Investigations of Thought
    Suppression in OCD*. Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
    35, 121-136.

[^5]: Mauss, I. B., Bunge, S. A. and Gross, J. J. (2007), *Automatic
    Emotion Regulation. Social and Personality Psychology Compass*, 1:
    146--167. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.2007.00005.x

[^6]: Nonomura, K. (2008). *Eat Sleep Sit: My Year at Japan\'s Most
    Rigorous Zen Temple*. Kodansha USA.

[^7]: Front Page Recruiting Slogan. USMC. (n.d.). Retrieved October 4,
    2015, from http://www.marines.com/

[^8]: Hof, W., & Rosales, J. (2011). *Becoming the Iceman, Pushing Past
    Perceived Limits*. Minneapolis: Mill City Press.
    http://www.icemanwimhof.com/shop/books/becomingtheicemanbook-en

[^9]: Originally termed "sign stimuli" in: Tinbergen N. (1948). Social
    releasers and the experimental method required for their study. *The
    Wilson Bulletin*, 60, 6--51. Retrieved from
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/4157642

[^10]: Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1997). Evolutionary psychology: A
    primer.

[^11]: Peterson, J. (2015, February 24). *Personality: 12
    Existentialism: Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche*.
    Lecture presented as part of the Personality and its Transformations
    Course in University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
    https://youtu.be/SsoVhKo4UvQ?t=54m30s

[^12]: Solzhenitsyn, A. (1970). Nobel Lecture. Retrieved October 4,
    2015, from
    http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/literature/laureates/1970/solzhenitsyn-lecture.html

[^13]: Breslow, J. (2015, July 27). The Staggering Death Toll of
    Mexico's Drug War. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/foreign-affairs-defense/drug-lord/the-staggering-death-toll-of-mexicos-drug-war/

[^14]: Canales, R. (2013, November 4). *The Deadly Genius of Drug
    Cartels*. Lecture presented as part of the a TED Conference in New
    York, New York, United States.
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYU25aJpg5o

[^15]: Cherry, K. (n.d.). The Asch Experiments: Why Do We Feel the Need
    to Conform? Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://psychology.about.com/od/classicpsychologystudies/p/conformity.htm

[^16]: Dyer, J. R. G., Ioannou, C. C., Morrell, L. J., Croft, D. P.,
    Couzin, I. D., Waters, D. A., & Krause, J. (2008). *Consensus
    Decision Making in Human Crowds*. Animal Behaviour, 75(2), 461-470.
    10.1016/j.anbehav.2007.05.010

[^17]: Cikara, M., Jenkins, A. C., Dufour, N., & Saxe, R. (2014*).
    Reduced Self-referential Neural Response during Intergroup
    Competition Predicts Competitor Harm*. NeuroImage, 96, 36--43.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.080

[^18]: Le Bon, G. (1896). *The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind*.

[^19]: Haffner, S. (1979). *Anmerkungen Zu Hitler*. English. Harvard
    University Press.

[^20]: Wilson, S. (1973, March 1). Bicycle Technology. *Scientific
    American*, pp81-91.

[^21]: Smil, V. (2008). *Energy in Nature and Society: General
    Energetics of Complex Systems*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

[^22]: Frankl, V. (1983, June 19). *Postscript 1984: The Case for a
    Tragic Optimism*. Lecture presented at Third World Congress of
    Logotherapy in Regensburg University, Regensburg.

[^23]: Ballantyne, C. (2011, July 20). The 12 Rules I Live By (What Are
    Yours?) - Early To Rise. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.earlytorise.com/12-rules/

[^24]: Circadian Rhythms Fact Sheet. (2012, November 1). Retrieved
    October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.nigms.nih.gov/Education/Pages/Factsheet\_CircadianRhythms.aspx

[^25]: St-Pierre, G. (2013). *The Way of the Fight*. HarperCollins.

[^26]: Dhabhar, F. S., Malarkey, W. B., Neri, E., & McEwen, B. S.
    (2012). *Stress-induced Redistribution of Immune Cells -- From
    Barracks to Boulevards to Battlefields: A Tale of Three Hormones --
    Curt Richter Award Winner.* Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37(9),
    1345--1368. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.05.008

[^27]: Qin, S., Young, C. B., Duan, X., Chen, T., Supekar, K., & Menon,
    V. (2014). Amygdala Subregional Structure and Intrinsic Functional
    Connectivity Predicts Individual Differences in Anxiety During Early
    Childhood. *Biological Psychiatry, 75*(11), 892-900.
    doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.006

[^28]: Weaver, I.C.G, Cervoni, N., Champagne, F.A., D\'Alessio, A.C.,
    Sharma, S., Seckl, J.R., Dymov, S., Szyf, M., & Meaney, M. (2004).
    *Epigenetic Programming by Maternal Behavior*. Nature Neuroscience,
    7, 847-854 (subscription required).

[^29]: McGonigal, K. (2013, June). How to Make Stress Your Friend.
    Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    https://www.ted.com/talks/kelly\_mcgonigal\_how\_to\_make\_stress\_your\_friend/

    Talk was part of the TEDGlobal 2013 event in Edinburgh, Scotland.

[^30]: Mandela, N. (1994). *Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of
    Nelson Mandela*. Boston: Little, Brown.

[^31]: Mark E.; Mineka, Susan; Barlow, David H. (2001). *A Modern
    Learning Theory Perspective on the Etiology of Panic Disorder*.
    Bouton, Psychological Review, Vol 108(1), Jan 2001, 4-32.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.108.1.4

[^32]: Suzuki, W. (2013, June 01). An Exercise-Meditation Smackdown.
    Retrieved October 04, 2015, from
    https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/brain-awakenings/201306/exercise-meditation-smackdown

[^33]: Tal A, Zuckerman S, Wansink B. Watch What You Eat: Action-Related
    Television Content Increases Food Intake. *JAMA Intern Med.*
    2014;174(11):1842-1843. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.4098.

[^34]: Kierkegaard, S. (1846). *Concluding Unscientific Postscript to
    Philosophical Fragments*. Copenhagen: University bookshop Reitzel.
    As translated by Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong

[^35]: Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2008). *Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
    Experience*. New York: Harper Row.

[^36]: Huxley, A. (1932). *Brave new world, a novel*. Garden City, N.Y.:
    Doubleday, Doran &.

[^37]: Baumeister, R., & Tierney, J. (2011). *Willpower: Rediscovering
    the Greatest Human Strength*. New York: Penguin Press.

[^38]: Antoni, R., Johnston, K., Collins, A., & Robertson, D. (2014,
    June 28). *The Effects of Intermittent Energy Restriction on Indices
    of Cardiometabolic Health*. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.ibimapublishing.com/journals/ENDO/2014/459119/a459119.html

[^39]: Becker, T. (n.d.). Hormesis. Retrieved October 04, 2015, from
    http://gettingstronger.org/hormesis/

[^40]: Jung, C. G. (1969). *The Structure and Dynamics of The Psyche*.
    Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[^41]: Karnazes, D. (2005). *Ultramarathon Man: Confessions of an
    All-Night Runner*. New York: J.P. Tarcher/Penguin.

[^42]: US Navy Seals' motto.

[^43]: Kübler-Ross, E. (1969). *On Death and Dying*.

[^44]: Taleb, N. N. (2012). *Antifragil: Things That Gain From
    Disorder*. Random House.

[^45]: Singer, P. (1979). *Practical Ethics*. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.

[^46]: Corbett, B. (1995, Fall). Corbett: Moral Obligations to Distant
    Others. Retrieved October 04, 2015, from
    http://faculty.webster.edu/corbetre/philosophy/moral/others/distant.html

[^47]: Sadler, A. (1918). *The Heike Monogatari.* Tokyo: Asiatic Society
    of Japan.

[^48]: VandenBos, G. R., & American Psychological Association. (2007).
    *APA Dictionary of Psychology*. Washington, DC: American
    Psychological Association.

[^49]: Fuhrmann, D., Knoll, L. J., & Blakemore, S. (2015). Adolescence
    as a Sensitive Period of Brain Development. *Cognitive Sciences*,
    19(10), 558-566. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661315001722

[^50]: Doidge, N. (2007). *The Brain That Changes Itself: Stories of
    Personal Triumph from the Frontiers of Brain Science*. New York:
    Viking.

[^51]: Lisle, D. J., & Goldhamer, A. (2003). *The Pleasure Trap:
    Mastering the Hidden Force that Undermines Health & Happiness*.
    Summertown, TN: Healthy Living Publications.

[^52]: Klein, S. (2010, March 30). Fatty Foods May Cause Cocaine-Like
    Addiction. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://edition.cnn.com/2010/HEALTH/03/28/fatty.foods.brain/index.html

[^53]: DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria: Gambling Disorder. (n.d.). Retrieved
    October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.problemgambling.ca/EN/ResourcesForProfessionals/Pages/DSM5CriteriaGamblingDisorder.aspx

    From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
    Edition (section 312.31)

[^54]: Zhou, Z., Zhu, H., Li, C., & Wang, J. (2014). Internet Addictive
    Individuals Share Impulsivity and Executive Dysfunction with
    Alcohol-Dependent Patients. *Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience*,
    8, 288. http://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00288

[^55]: Mori, A., Iwadate, M., Minakawa, NT & Kawashima, S. (2015). Game
    Addiction. *Nihon Rinsho*,*73*(9),1567-73.

[^56]: Chevy, C. (2011, August 15). ASAM Releases New Definition of
    Addiction. Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://www.asam.org/docs/pressreleases/asam-definition-of-addiction-2011-08-15.pdf?sfvrsn=6

[^57]: Olsen, C. M. (2011). Natural Rewards, Neuroplasticity, and
    Non-Drug Addictions. *Neuropharmacology, 61*(7), 1109--1122.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.03.010

[^58]: Eric J. Nestler, *ΔFosB: a Molecular Switch for Reward*, Journal
    of Drug and Alcohol Research, 2 (2013), art235651.
    doi:10.4303/jdar/235651

[^59]: Brand, M.; Young, K.S.; Laier, C. *Prefrontal control and
    internet addiction: A theoretical model and review of
    neuropsychological and neuroimaging findings*. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
    2014, 8, 375. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24904393

[^60]: Simone Kühn, PhD; Jürgen Gallinat, PhD. *Brain Structure and
    Functional Connectivity Associated With Pornography Consumption*.
    May 2014, JAMA Psy.
    http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1874574

[^61]: NoFap: Get a New Grip on Life. (n.d.). Retrieved October 4, 2015,
    from https://www.reddit.com/r/NoFap

[^62]: Kyle K. Pitchers, Margaret E. Balfour, Michael N. Lehman, Neil M.
    Richtand, Lei Yu, and Lique M. Coolen. *Neuroplasticity in the
    Mesolimbic System Induced by Natural Reward and Subsequent
    Abstinence*.
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2854191/?tool=pubmed

[^63]: How Long Will it Take to Recover From Porn-Induced Sexual
    Dysfunction? (n.d.). Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://yourbrainonporn.com/how-long-will-it-take

[^64]: Woods, J. H. (1978). Behavioral pharmacology of drug
    self-administration. In M.A. Lipton, A. DiMascio, and K.F. Killam
    (Eds.), Psychopharmcology: A generation of progress. New York:
    Raven.

[^65]: Goldstein, A. (1979). Heroin maintenance: A medical view. A
    conversation between a physician and a politician. *Journal of Drug
    Issues, 9*, 341-347

[^66]: Alexander, B.K., Beyerstein, B.L., Hadaway, P.F., and Coambs,
    R.B. (1981) \"Effect of early and later colony housing on oral
    ingestion of morphine in rats,\" *Pharmacology Biochemistry and
    Behavior*, Vol 15, 4:571--576.

[^67]: African poverb, cited in: Seymour, W., Smith, R., & Torres, H.
    (2014). *Building a Better Man: A Blueprint for Decreasing Violence
    and Increasing Prosocial Behavior in Men. Routledge.*

[^68]: Ryan, C. (2010, April 20). Sexual Repression: The Malady That
    Considers Itself the Remedy. Retrieved October 04, 2015, from
    https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/sex-dawn/201004/sexual-repression-the-malady-considers-itself-the-remedy

[^69]: 92% of Married Women in Egypt Have Undergone Female Genital
    Mutilation. (2015, May 10). Retrieved October 4, 2015, from
    http://egyptianstreets.com/2015/05/10/92-of-married-women-in-egypt-have-undergone-female-genital-mutilation/

[^70]: MacFarquhar, R., & Schoenhals, M. (2006). *Mao\'s last
    revolution*. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University
    Press.

[^71]: Hobbs, H. (2011, October 29). Trial of the Khmer Rogue. Retrieved
    October 04, 2015, from
    https://web.archive.org/web/20120422004018/http://www.woroni.com.au/articles/features/trial-khmer-rogue

    Archived from the original webpage on 2012-04-22

[^72]: Juliá, S., & Casanova, J. (1999). *Víctimas de la Guerra Civil*.
    Madrid: Temas de Hoy.

[^73]: Strauss, N. (2005). *The Game.* New York, NT: ReganBooks.

[^74]: Bernays, E. L. (1928). *Propaganda*. New York: Horace Liveright.

[^75]: Curtis, A. (Director). (2002). *The Century of the Self*
    \[Documentary Series\]. United Kingdom: BBC.

[^76]: Gilens, Martin & I. Page, Benjamin. (2014). Testing Theories of
    American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens.
    Perspective on Politics. 12. 564-581. 10.1017/S1537592714001595.

[^77]: Masters, R., & Baker, D. (1978). *How your mind can keep you
    well*. Los Angeles: Foundation of Human Understanding.

[^78]: Generally attributed Jung, C. G.

[^79]: Ramsey, D. (2014). *The Legacy Journey: A Radical View of
    Biblical Wealth and Generosity*. Ramsey Press.

[^80]: Rogan, J. (2014, June 30). *Joe Rogan Experience \#517 - Crash,
    from Float Lab (Part 2)*. https://youtu.be/W9VLQqQ52Gk?t=37m26s

[^81]: Otten, M., & Jonas, K. J. (2013). Humiliation as an intense
    emotional experience: Evidence from the electro-encephalogram.
    *Social Neuroscience,* *9*(1), 23-35.
    doi:10.1080/17470919.2013.855660

[^82]: University of Chicago. (2009, February 17). Loneliness Affects
    How The Brain Operates. *ScienceDaily*. Retrieved October 04, 2015
    from www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/02/090215151800.htm

[^83]: Russell, J. A., Leng, G., & Douglas, A. J. (2003). The
    magnocellular oxytocin system, the fount of maternity: Adaptations
    in pregnancy. *Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology,* *24*(1), 27-61.
    doi:10.1016/s0091-3022(02)00104-8

[^84]: Poulin, M. J., Brown, S. L., Dillard, A. J., & Smith, D. M.
    (2013). Giving to Others and the Association Between Stress and
    Mortality. *Am J Public Health American Journal of Public Health,*
    *103*(9), 1649-1655. doi:10.2105/ajph.2012.300876

[^85]: Kubzansky, L. D., Mendes, W. B., Appleton, A. A., Block, J., &
    Adler, G. K. (2012). A Heartfelt Response: Oxytocin Effects on
    Response to Social Stress in Men and Women. *Biological Psychology*,
    *90*(1), 1--9. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.02.010

[^86]: Franklin, B. (1755). *Poor Richard's Almanac*.

[^87]: Johnson, P. M., & Kenny, P. J. (2010). Dopamine D2 receptors in
    addiction-like reward dysfunction and compulsive eating in obese
    rats. *Nature Neuroscience Nat Neurosci,* *13*(5), 635-641.
    doi:10.1038/nn.2519

[^88]: Wile, D. (1992). *Art of the bedchamber: The Chinese sexual yoga
    classics including women\'s solo meditation texts*. Albany: State
    University of New York Press.

[^89]: Csikszentmihaly, M. (2012). Into the Classroom Media Presents:
    Flow: Psychology, Creativity, & Optimal Experience. Retrieved
    October 04, 2015, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cuZi2YCtcJs
